This novel was both a joy and a challenge to write; a joy because it’s my hope that the characters refl ect the honor and
integrity of those who serve in the military, and a challenge
because . . . well, to be completely honest, I fi nd that every novel
I write is challenging. There are those people, however, who make
the challenge that much easier, and without further ado, I’d like
to thank them.
To Cat, my wife and the woman I love with all my heart. Thanks
for your patience, babe.
To Miles, Ryan, Landon, Lexie, and Savannah, my children.
Thanks for your endless enthusiasm, kids.
To Theresa Park, my agent. Thanks for everything.
To Jamie Raab, my editor. Thanks for your kindness and wisdom.
To David Young, the new CEO of Hachette Book Group
USA, Maureen Egen, Jennifer Romanello, Harvey-Jane Kowal,
Shannon O’Keefe, Sharon Krassney, Abby Koons, Denise
DiNovi, Edna Farley, Howie Sanders, David Park, Flag, Scott
Schwimer, Lynn Harris, Mark Johnson . . . I’m thankful for your
friendship.
To my fellow coaches and athletes on the New Bern High track
team (which won both the indoor and outdoor North Carolina
Acknowledgments
....Z....
State Championships): Dave Simpson, Philemon Gray, Karjuan
Williams, Darryl Reynolds, Anthony Hendrix, Eddie Armstrong,
Andrew Hendrix, Mike Weir, Dan Castelow, Marques Moore,
Raishad Dobie, Darryl Barnes, Jayr Whitfi eld, Kelvin Hardesty,
Julian Carter, and Brett Whitney . . . what a season, guys!
viii Nicholas Sparks


Lenoir, 2006
What does it mean to truly love another? There was a time in my life when I thought I knew the answer:
It meant that I’d care for Savannah more deeply than I cared for
myself and that we’d spend the rest of our lives together. It
wouldn’t have taken much. She once told me that the key to happiness
was achievable dreams, and hers were nothing out of the
ordinary. Marriage, family . . . the basics. It meant I’d have a
steady job, the house with the white picket fence, and a minivan
or SUV big enough to haul our kids to school or to the dentist or
off to soccer practice or piano recitals. Two or three kids, she was
never clear on that, but my hunch is that when the time came,
she would have suggested that we let nature take its course and
allow God to make the decision. She was like that—religious, I
mean—and I suppose that was part of the reason I fell for her.
But no matter what was going on in our lives, I could imagine
lying beside her in bed at the end of the day, holding her while
we talked and laughed, lost in each other’s arms.
It doesn’t sound so far-fetched, right? When two people love
each other? That’s what I thought, too. And while part of me still
Prologue
....Z....
wants to believe it’s possible, I know it’s not going to happen.
When I leave here again, I’ll never come back.
For now, though, I’ll sit on the hillside overlooking her ranch
and wait for her to appear. She won’t be able to see me, of course.
In the army, you learn to blend into your surroundings, and I
learned well, because I had no desire to die in some backward
foreign dump in the middle of the Iraqi desert. But I had to come
back to this small North Carolina mountain town to fi nd out what
happened. When a person sets a thing in motion, there’s a feeling
of unease, almost regret, until you learn the truth.
But of this I am certain: Savannah will never know I’ve been
here today.
Part of me aches at the thought of her being so close yet so
untouchable, but her story and mine are different now. It wasn’t
easy for me to accept this simple truth, because there was a time
when our stories were the same, but that was six years and two
lifetimes ago. There are memories for both of us, of course, but
I’ve learned that memories can have a physical, almost living
presence, and in this, Savannah and I are different as well. If
hers are stars in the nighttime sky, mine are the haunted empty
spaces in between. And unlike her, I’ve been burdened by questions
I’ve asked myself a thousand times since the last time we
were together. Why did I do it? And would I do it again?
It was I, you see, who ended it.
On the trees surrounding me, the leaves are just beginning
their slow turn toward the color of fi re, glowing as the sun peeks
over the horizon. Birds have begun their morning calls, and the
air is perfumed with the scent of pine and earth; different from
the brine and salt of my hometown. In time, the front door cracks
open, and it’s then that I see her. Despite the distance between
us, I fi nd myself holding my breath as she steps into the dawn.
She stretches before descending the front steps and heads
around the side. Beyond her, the horse pasture shimmers like a
green ocean, and she passes through the gate that leads toward
2 Nicholas Sparks
it. A horse calls out a greeting, as does another, and my fi rst
thought is that Savannah seems too small to be moving so easily
among them. But she was always comfortable with horses, and
they were comfortable with her. A half dozen nibble on grass near
the fence post, mainly quarter horses, and Midas, her whitesocked
black Arabian, stands off to one side. I rode with her
once, luckily without injury, and as I was hanging on for dear life,
I remember thinking that she looked so relaxed in the saddle that
she could have been watching television. Savannah takes a moment
to greet Midas now. She rubs his nose while she whispers
something, she pats his haunches, and when she turns away, his
ears prick up as she heads toward the barn.
She vanishes, then emerges again, carrying two pails—oats,
I think. She hangs the pails on two fence posts, and a couple
of the horses trot toward them. When she steps back to make
room, I see her hair fl utter in the breeze before she retrieves a
saddle and bridle. While Midas eats, she readies him for her
ride, and a few minutes later she’s leading him from the pasture,
toward the trails in the forest, looking exactly as she did
six years ago. I know it isn’t true—I saw her up close last year
and noticed the fi rst fi ne lines beginning to form around her
eyes—but the prism through which I view her remains for me
unchanging. To me, she will always be twenty-one and I will
always be twenty-three. I’d been stationed in Germany; I had
yet to go to Fallujah or Baghdad or receive her letter, which I
read in the railroad station in Samawah in the initial weeks of
the campaign; I had yet to return home from the events that
changed the course of my life.
Now, at twenty-nine, I sometimes wonder about the choices
I’ve made. The army has become the only life I know. I don’t
know whether I should be pissed or pleased about that fact; most
of the time, I fi nd myself going back and forth, depending on the
day. When people ask, I tell them I’m a grunt, and I mean it. I
still live on base in Germany, I have maybe a thousand dollars in
DEAR JOHN 3
savings, and I haven’t been on a date in years. I don’t surf much
anymore even on leave, but on my days off I ride my Harley north
or south, wherever my mood strikes me. The Harley was the
single best thing I’ve ever bought for myself, though it cost a
fortune over there. It suits me, since I’ve become something of
a loner. Most of my buddies have left the service, but I’ll probably
get sent back to Iraq in the next couple of months. At least,
those are the rumors around base. When I fi rst met Savannah
Lynn Curtis—to me, she’ll always be Savannah Lynn Curtis—I
could never have predicted my life would turn out the way it has
or believed I’d make the army my career.
But I did meet her; that’s the thing that makes my current
life so strange. I fell in love with her when we were together,
then fell deeper in love with her in the years we were apart. Our
story has three parts: a beginning, a middle, and an end. And
although this is the way all stories unfold, I still can’t believe
that ours didn’t go on forever.
I refl ect on these things, and as always, our time together
comes back to me. I fi nd myself remembering how it began, for
now these memories are all I have left.
4 Nicholas Sparks
PART I
....Z....

Wilmington, 2000
My name is John Tyree. I was born in 1977, and I grew
up in Wilmington, North Carolina, a city that proudly boasts the
largest port in the state as well as a long and vibrant history but
now strikes me more as a city that came about by accident. Sure,
the weather was great and the beaches perfect, but it wasn’t ready
for the wave of Yankee retirees up north who wanted someplace
cheap to spend their golden years. The city is located on a relatively
thin spit of land bounded by the Cape Fear River on one
side and the ocean on the other. Highway 17—which leads to
Myrtle Beach and Charleston—bisects the town and serves as its
major road. When I was a kid, my dad and I could drive from the
historic district near the Cape Fear River to Wrightsville Beach
in ten minutes, but so many stoplights and shopping centers have
been added that it can now take an hour, especially on the weekends,
when the tourists come fl ooding in. Wrightsville Beach,
located on an island just off the coast, is on the northern end of
Wilmington and far and away one of the most popular beaches
in the state. The homes along the dunes are ridiculously expensive,
and most of them are rented out all summer long. The Outer
One
....Z....
Banks may have more romantic appeal because of their isolation
and wild horses and that fl ight that Orville and Wilbur were famous
for, but let me tell you, most people who go to the beach
on vacation feel most at home when they can fi nd a McDonald’s
or Burger King nearby, in case the little ones aren’t too fond of
the local fare, and want more than a couple of choices when it
comes to evening activities.
Like all cities, Wilmington is rich in places and poor in others,
and since my dad had one of the steadiest, solid-citizen jobs on
the planet—he drove a mail delivery route for the post offi ce—we
did okay. Not great, but okay. We weren’t rich, but we lived close
enough to the rich area for me to attend one of the best high
schools in the city. Unlike my friends’ homes, though, our house
was old and small; part of the porch had begun to sag, but the yard
was its saving grace. There was a big oak tree in the backyard, and
when I was eight years old, I built a tree house with scraps of wood
I collected from a construction site. My dad didn’t help me with
the project (if he hit a nail with a hammer, it could honestly be
called an accident); it was the same summer I taught myself to
surf. I suppose I should have realized then how different I was from
my dad, but that just shows how little you know about life when
you’re a kid.
My dad and I were as different as two people could possibly be.
Where he was passive and introspective, I was always in motion
and hated to be alone; while he placed a high value on education,
school for me was like a social club with sports added in. He had
poor posture and tended to shuffl e when he walked; I bounced
from here to there, forever asking him to time how long it took
me to run to the end of the block and back. I was taller than him
by the time I was in eighth grade and could beat him in armwrestling
a year later. Our physical features were completely different,
too. While he had sandy hair, hazel eyes, and freckles, I
had brown hair and eyes, and my olive skin would darken to a
deep tan by May. Our differences struck some of our neighbors as
8 Nicholas Sparks
odd, which made sense, I suppose, considering that he’d raised me
by himself. As I grew older, I sometimes heard them whispering
about the fact that my mom had run off when I was less than a
year old. Though I later suspected my mom had met someone else,
my dad never confi rmed this. All he’d say was that she’d realized
she made a mistake in getting married so young, and that she
wasn’t ready to be a mother. He neither heaped scorn on her nor
praised her, but he made sure that I included her in my prayers,
no matter where she was or what she’d done. “You remind me of
her,” he’d say sometimes. To this day, I’ve never spoken a single
word to her, nor do I have any desire to do so.
I think my dad was happy. I phrase it like this because he seldom
showed much emotion. Hugs and kisses were a rarity for me
growing up, and when they did happen, they often struck me as
lifeless, something he did because he felt he was supposed to, not
because he wanted to. I know he loved me by the way he devoted
himself to my care, but he was forty-three when he had me, and
part of me thinks my dad would have been better suited to being
a monk than a parent. He was the quietest man I’ve ever known.
He asked few questions about what was going on in my life, and
while he rarely grew angry, he rarely joked, either. He lived for
routine. He cooked me scrambled eggs, toast, and bacon every
single morning and listened as I talked about school over a dinner
he’d prepared as well. He scheduled visits to the dentist two
months in advance, paid his bills on Saturday morning, did the
laundry on Sunday afternoon, and left the house every morning
at exactly 7:35 a.m. He was socially awkward and spent long hours
alone every day, dropping packages and bunches of mail into the
mailboxes along his route. He didn’t date, nor did he spend weekend
nights playing poker with his buddies; the telephone could
stay silent for weeks. When it did ring, it was either a wrong number
or a telemarketer. I know how hard it must have been for him
to raise me on his own, but he never complained, even when I
disappointed him.
DEAR JOHN 9
I spent most of my evenings alone. With the duties of the day
fi nally completed, my dad would head to his den to be with his
coins. That was his one great passion in life. He was most content
while sitting in his den, studying a coin dealer newsletter nicknamed
the Greysheet and trying to fi gure out the next coin he
should add to his collection. Actually, it was my grandfather who
originally started the coin collection. My grandfather’s hero was
a man named Louis Eliasberg, a Baltimore fi nancier who is the
only person to have assembled a complete collection of United
States coins, including all the various dates and mint marks. His
collection rivaled, if not surpassed, the collection at the Smithsonian,
and after the death of my grandmother in 1951, my grandfather
became transfi xed by the idea of building a collection with
his son. During the summers, my grandfather and dad would travel
by train to the various mints to collect the new coins fi rsthand or
visit various coin shows in the Southeast. In time, my grandfather
and dad established relationships with coin dealers across the
country, and my grandfather spent a fortune over the years trading
up and improving the collection. Unlike Louis Eliasberg, however,
my grandfather wasn’t rich—he owned a general store in
Burgaw that went out of business when the Piggly Wiggly opened
its doors across town—and never had a chance at matching
Eliasberg’s collection. Even so, every extra dollar went into coins.
My grandfather wore the same jacket for thirty years, drove the
same car his entire life, and I’m pretty sure my dad went to work
for the postal service instead of heading off to college because
there wasn’t a dime left over to pay for anything beyond a high
school education. He was an odd duck, that’s for sure, as was my
dad. Like father, like son, as the old saying goes. When the old
man fi nally passed away, he specifi ed in his will that his house be
sold and the money used to purchase even more coins, which was
exactly what my dad probably would have done anyway.
By the time my dad inherited the collection, it was already
quite valuable. When infl ation went through the roof and gold hit
10 Nicholas Sparks
$850 an ounce, it was worth a small fortune, more than enough
for my frugal dad to retire a few times over and more than it would
be worth a quarter century later. But neither my grandfather nor
my dad had been into collecting for the money; they were in it for
the thrill of the hunt and the bond it created between them.
There was something exciting about searching long and hard for
a specifi c coin, fi nally locating it, then wheeling and dealing to
get it for the right price. Sometimes a coin was affordable, other
times it wasn’t, but each and every piece they added was a treasure.
My dad hoped to share the same passion with me, including
the sacrifi ce it required. Growing up, I had to sleep with extra
blankets in the winter, and I got a single pair of new shoes every
year; there was never money for my clothes, unless they came from
the Salvation Army. My dad didn’t even own a camera. The only
picture ever taken of us was at a coin show in Atlanta. A dealer
snapped it as we stood before his booth and sent it to us. For years
it was perched on my dad’s desk. In the photo, my dad had his arm
draped over my shoulder, and we were both beaming. In my hand,
I was holding a 1926-D buffalo nickel in gem condition, a coin
that my dad had just purchased. It was among the rarest of all buffalo
nickels, and we ended up eating hot dogs and beans for a
month, since it cost more than he’d expected.
But I didn’t mind the sacrifi ces—for a while, anyway. When my
dad started talking to me about coins—I must have been in the
fi rst or second grade at the time—he spoke to me like an equal.
Having an adult, especially your dad, treat you like an equal is a
heady thing for any young child, and I basked in the attention,
absorbing the information. In time, I could tell you how many
Saint-Gaudens double eagles were minted in 1927 as compared
with 1924 and why an 1895 Barber dime minted in New Orleans
was ten times more valuable than the same coin minted in the
same year in Philadelphia. I still can, by the way. Yet unlike my
dad, I eventually began to grow out of my passion for collecting.
It was all my dad seemed able to talk about, and after six or seven
DEAR JOHN 11
years of weekends spent with him instead of friends, I wanted out.
Like most boys, I started to care about other things: sports and girls
and cars and music, primarily, and by fourteen, I was spending
little time at home. My resentment began to grow as well. Little
by little, I began to notice differences in the way we lived when I
compared myself with most of my friends. While they had money
to spend to go to the movies or buy a stylish pair of sunglasses, I
found myself scrounging for quarters in the couch to buy myself a
burger at McDonald’s. More than a few of my friends received cars
for their sixteenth birthday; my dad gave me an 1883 Morgan
silver dollar that had been minted in Carson City. Tears in our
worn couch were covered by a blanket, and we were the only family
I knew who didn’t have cable television or a microwave oven.
When our refrigerator broke down, he bought a used one that was
the world’s most awful shade of green, a color that matched nothing
else in the kitchen. I was embarrassed at the thought of having
friends come over, and I blamed my dad for that. I know it was a
pretty crappy way to feel—if the lack of money bothered me so
much, I could have mowed lawns or worked odd jobs, for instance—
but that’s the way it was. I was as blind as a snail and
dumb as a camel, but even if I told you I regret my immaturity
now, I can’t undo the past.
My dad sensed that something was changing, but he was at a
loss as to what to do about us. He tried, though, in the only way
he knew how, the only way his father knew. He talked about
coins—it was the one topic he could discuss with ease—and continued
to cook my breakfasts and dinners; but our estrangement
grew worse over time. At the same time, I pulled away from the
friends I’d always known. They were breaking into cliques, based
primarily on what movies they were going to see or the latest
shirts they bought from the mall, and I found myself on the outside
looking in. Screw them, I thought. In high school, there’s
always a place for everyone, and I began falling in with the wrong
sort of crowd, a crowd that didn’t give a damn about anything,
12 Nicholas Sparks
which left me not giving a damn, either. I began to cut classes and
smoke and was suspended for fi ghting on three occasions.
I gave up sports, too. I’d played football and basketball and run
track until I was a sophomore, and though my dad sometimes
asked how I did when I got home, he seemed uncomfortable if I
went into detail, since it was obvious he didn’t know a thing about
sports. He’d never been on a team in his life. He showed up for a
single basketball game during my sophomore year. He sat in the
stands, an odd balding guy wearing a worn sport jacket and socks
that didn’t match. Though he wasn’t obese, his pants nipped at
the waist, making him look as if he were three months pregnant,
and I knew I wanted nothing to do with him. I was embarrassed
by the sight of him, and after the game, I avoided him. I’m not
proud of myself for that, but that’s who I was.
Things got worse. During my senior year, my rebellion reached
a high point. My grades had been slipping for two years, more from
laziness and lack of care than intelligence (I like to think), and
more than once my dad caught me sneaking in late at night with
booze on my breath. I was escorted home by the police after being
found at a party where drugs and drinking were evident, and when
my dad grounded me, I stayed at a friend’s house for a couple of
weeks after raging at him to mind his own business. He said nothing
upon my return; instead, scrambled eggs, toast, and bacon were
on the table in the mornings as usual. I barely passed my classes, and
I suspect the school let me graduate simply because it wanted me
out of there. I know my dad was worried, and he would sometimes,
in his own shy way, broach the subject of college, but by then I’d
made up my mind not to go. I wanted a job, I wanted a car, I
wanted those material things I’d lived eighteen years without.
I said nothing to him about it one way or the other until the
summer after graduation, but when he realized I hadn’t even applied
to junior college, he locked himself in his den for the rest of
the night and said nothing to me over our eggs and bacon the next
morning. Later that evening, he tried to engage me in another
DEAR JOHN 13
discussion about coins, as if grasping for the companionship that
had somehow been lost between us.
“Do you remember when we went to Atlanta and you were the
one who found that buffalo head nickel we’d been looking for for
years?” he started. “The one where we had our picture taken? I’ll
never forget how excited you were. It reminded me of my father
and me.”
I shook my head, all the frustration of life with my dad coming
to the surface. “I’m sick and tired of hearing about coins!” I shouted
at him. “I never want to hear about them again! You should sell
the damn collection and do something else. Anything else.”
My dad said nothing, but to this day I’ll never forget his pained
expression when at last he turned and trudged back to his den. I’d
hurt him, and though I told myself I hadn’t wanted to, deep down
I knew I was lying to myself. From then on my dad rarely brought
up the subject of coins again. Nor did I. It became a yawning gulf
between us, and it left us with nothing to say to each other. A few
days later, I realized that the only photograph of us was gone as
well, as if he believed that even the slightest reminder of coins
would offend me. At the time, it probably would have, and even
though I assumed that he’d thrown it away, the realization didn’t
bother me at all.
Growing up, I’d never considered entering the military. Despite
the fact that eastern North Carolina is one of the most militarily
dense areas of the country—there are seven bases within a few
hours’ driving time from Wilmington—I used to think that military
life was for losers. Who wanted to spend his life getting ordered
around by a bunch of crew-cut fl unkies? Not me, and aside
from the ROTC guys, not many people in my high school, either.
Instead, most of the kids who’d been good students headed off to
the University of North Carolina or North Carolina State, while
the kids who hadn’t been good students stayed behind, bumming
around from one lousy job to the next, drinking beer and hanging
14 Nicholas Sparks
out, and pretty much avoiding anything that might require a shred
of responsibility.
I fell into the latter category. In the couple of years after graduation,
I went through a succession of jobs, working as a busboy at
Outback Steakhouse, tearing ticket stubs at the local movie theater,
loading and unloading boxes at Staples, cooking pancakes at
Waffl e House, and working as a cashier at a couple of tourist places
that sold crap to the out-of-towners. I spent every dime I earned,
had zero illusions about eventually working my way up the ladder
to management, and ended up getting fi red from every job I had.
For a while, I didn’t care. I was living my life. I was big into surfi ng
late and sleeping in, and since I was still living at home, none of
my income was needed for things like rent or food or insurance or
preparing for a future. Besides, none of my friends was doing any
better than I was. I don’t remember being particularly unhappy, but
after a while I just got tired of my life. Not the surfi ng part—in
1996, Hurricanes Bertha and Fran slammed into the coast, and
those were some of the best waves in years—but hanging out at
Leroy’s bar afterward. I began to realize that every night was the
same. I’d be drinking beers and bump into someone I’d known from
high school, and they’d ask what I was doing and I’d tell them, and
they’d tell me what they were doing, and it didn’t take a genius to
fi gure out we were both on the fast track to nowhere. Even if they
had their own place, which I didn’t, I never believed them when
they told me they liked their job as ditch digger or window washer
or Porta Potti hauler, because I knew full well that none of those
were the kinds of occupations they’d grown up dreaming about. I
might have been lazy in the classroom, but I wasn’t stupid.
I dated dozens of women during that period. At Leroy’s, there
were always women. Most were forgettable relationships. I used
women and allowed myself to be used and always kept my feelings
to myself. Only my relationship with a girl named Lucy lasted
more than a few months, and for a short time before we inevitably
DEAR JOHN 15
drifted apart, I thought I was in love with her. She was a student
at UNC Wilmington, a year older than me, and wanted to work
in New York after she graduated. “I care about you,” she told me
on our last night together, “but you and I want different things.
You could do so much more with your life, but for some reason,
you’re content to simply fl oat along.” She’d hesitated before going
on. “But more than that, I never know how you really feel about
me.” I knew she was right. Soon after, she left on a plane without
bothering to say good-bye. A year later, after getting her number
from her parents, I called her and we talked for twenty minutes.
She was engaged to an attorney, she told me, and would be married
the following June.
The phone call affected me more than I thought it would. It
came on a day when I’d just been fi red—again—and I went to
console myself at Leroy’s, as always. The same crowd of losers was
there, and I suddenly realized that I didn’t want to spend another
pointless evening pretending that everything in my life was okay.
Instead, I bought a six-pack of beer and went to sit on the beach.
It was the fi rst time in years that I actually thought about what I
was doing with my life, and I wondered whether I should take my
dad’s advice and get a college degree. I’d been out of school for so
long, though, that the idea felt foreign and ridiculous. Call it luck
or bad luck, but right then two marines jogged by. Young and fi t,
they radiated easy confi dence. If they could do it, I told myself, I
could do it, too.
I mulled it over for a couple of days, and in the end, my dad had
something to do with my decision. Not that I talked to him about
it, of course—we weren’t talking at all by then. I was walking
toward the kitchen one night and saw him sitting at his desk, as
always. But this time, I really studied him. His hair was mostly gone,
and the little that was left had turned completely silver by his ears.
He was nearing retirement, and I was struck by the notion that I
had no right to keep letting him down after all he’d done for me.
So I joined the military. My fi rst thought was that I’d join the
16 Nicholas Sparks
marines, since they were the guys I was most familiar with.
Wrightsville Beach was always packed with jarheads from Camp
Lejeune or Cherry Point, but when the time came, I picked the
army. I fi gured I’d be handed a rifl e either way, but what really
closed the deal was that the marines recruiter was having lunch
when I swung by and wasn’t immediately available, while the
army recruiter—whose offi ce was right across the street—was. In
the end, the decision felt more spontaneous than planned, but I
signed on the dotted line for a four-year enlistment, and when the
recruiter slapped my back and congratulated me as I went out the
door, I found myself wondering what I’d gotten myself into. That
was in late 1997, and I was twenty years old.
Boot camp at Fort Benning was just as miserable as I thought it
would be. The whole thing seemed designed to humiliate and
brainwash us into following orders without question, no matter
how stupid they might be, but I adapted more quickly than a lot of
the guys. Once I got through it, I chose the infantry. We spent the
next few months doing a lot of simulations in places like Louisiana
and good old Fort Bragg, where we basically learned the best ways
to kill people and break things; and after a while, my unit, as part
of the First Infantry Division—aka the Big Red One—was sent to
Germany. I didn’t speak a word of German, but it didn’t matter,
since pretty much everyone I dealt with spoke English. It was easy
at fi rst, then army life set in. I spent seven lousy months in the
Balkans—fi rst in Macedonia in 1999, then in Kosovo, where I
stayed until the late spring of 2000. Life in the army didn’t pay
much, but considering there was no rent, no food expenses, and
really nothing to spend my paychecks on even when I got them, I
had money in the bank for the fi rst time. Not a lot, but enough.
I spent my fi rst leave at home completely bored out of my mind.
I spent my second leave in Las Vegas. One of my buddies had grown
up there, and three of us crashed at his parents’ place. I blew
through pretty much everything I’d saved. On my third leave, after
coming back from Kosovo, I was desperately in need of a break and
DEAR JOHN 17
decided to head back home, hoping the boredom of the visit would
be enough to calm my mind. Because of the distance, my dad and I
seldom talked on the phone, but he wrote me letters that were always
postmarked on the fi rst of every month. They weren’t like the
ones my buddies got from their moms or sisters or wives. Nothing
too personal, nothing mushy, and never a word that suggested he
missed me. Nor did he ever mention coins. Instead, he wrote about
changes in the neighborhood and a lot about the weather; when I
wrote to tell him about a pretty hairy fi refi ght I’d been in in the
Balkans, he wrote back to say that he was glad I survived, but said
no more about it. I knew by the way he phrased his response that
he didn’t want to hear about the dangerous things I did. The fact
that I was in peril frightened him, so I started omitting the scary
stuff. Instead, I sent him letters about how guard duty was without
a doubt the most boring job ever invented and that the only exciting
thing to happen to me in weeks was trying to guess how many
cigarettes the other guard would actually smoke in a single evening.
My dad ended every letter with the promise that he would write
again soon, and once again, the man didn’t let me down. He was,
I’ve long since come to believe, a far better man than I’ll ever be.
But I’d grown up in the previous three years. Yeah, I know, I’m
a walking cliché—go in as a boy, come out as a man and all that.
But everyone in the army is forced to grow up, especially if you’re
in the infantry like me. You’re entrusted with equipment that
costs a fortune, others put their trust in you, and if you screw up,
the penalty is a lot more serious than being sent to bed without
supper. Sure, there’s too much paperwork and boredom, and everyone
smokes and can’t complete a sentence without cursing
and has boxes of dirty magazines under his bed, and you have to
answer to ROTC guys fresh out of college who think grunts like
me have the IQs of Neanderthals; but you’re forced to learn the
most important lesson in life, and that’s the fact that you have to
live up to your responsibilities, and you’d better do it right. When
18 Nicholas Sparks
given an order, you can’t say no. It’s no exaggeration to say that
lives are on the line. One wrong decision, and your buddy might
die. It’s this fact that makes the army work. That’s the big mistake
a lot of people make when they wonder how soldiers can put their
lives on the line day after day or how they can fi ght for something
they may not believe in. Not everyone does. I’ve worked with
soldiers on all sides of the political spectrum; I’ve met some who
hated the army and others who wanted to make it a career. I’ve
met geniuses and idiots, but when all is said and done, we do what
we do for one another. For friendship. Not for country, not for
patriotism, not because we’re programmed killing machines, but
because of the guy next to you. You fi ght for your friend, to keep
him alive, and he fi ghts for you, and everything about the army is
built on this simple premise.
But like I said, I had changed. I went into the army as a smoker
and almost coughed up a lung during boot camp, but unlike practically
everyone else in my unit, I quit and hadn’t touched the
things in over two years. I moderated my drinking to the point
that one or two beers a week was suffi cient, and I might go a
month without having any at all. My record was spotless. I’d been
promoted from private to corporal and then, six months later, to
sergeant, and I learned that I had an ability to lead. I’d led men in
fi refi ghts, and my squad was involved in capturing one of the most
notorious war criminals in the Balkans. My commanding offi cer
recommended me for Offi cer Candidate School (OCS), and I was
debating whether or not to become an offi cer, but that sometimes
meant a desk job and even more paperwork, and I wasn’t sure I
wanted that. Aside from surfi ng, I hadn’t exercised in years before
I joined the service; by the time I took my third leave, I’d put on
twenty pounds of muscle and cut the fl ab from my belly. I spent
most of my free time running, boxing, and weight lifting with
Tony, a musclehead from New York who always shouted when he
talked, swore that tequila was an aphrodisiac, and was far and
DEAR JOHN 19
away my best friend in the unit. He talked me into getting tattoos
on both arms just like him, and with every passing day, the memory
of who I once had been became more and more distant.
I read a lot, too. In the army, you have a lot of time to read, and
people trade books back and forth or sign them out from the library
until the covers are practically worn away. I don’t want you
to get the impression that I became a scholar, because I didn’t. I
wasn’t into Chaucer or Proust or Dostoevsky or any of those other
dead guys; I read mainly mysteries and thrillers and books by Stephen
King, and I took a particular liking to Carl Hiaasen because
his words fl owed easily and he always made me laugh. I couldn’t
help but think that if schools had assigned these books in English
class, we’d have a lot more readers in the world.
Unlike my buddies, I shied away from any prospect of female
companionship. Sounds weird, right? Prime of life, testosteronefi
lled job—what could be more natural than searching for a little
release with the help of a female? It wasn’t for me. Although some
of the guys I knew dated and even married the locals while stationed
in Würzburg, I’d heard enough stories to know that those
marriages seldom worked out. The military was hard on relationships
in general—I’d seen enough divorces to know that—and
while I wouldn’t have minded the company of someone special, it
just never happened. Tony couldn’t understand it.
“You gotta come with me,” he’d plead. “You never come.”
“I’m not in the mood.”
“How can you not be in the mood? Sabine swears her friend is
gorgeous. Tall and blond, and she loves tequila.”
“Bring Don. I’m sure he’d like to go.”
“Castelow? No way. Sabine can’t stand him.”
I said nothing.
“We’re just going to have a little fun.”
I shook my head, thinking that I’d rather be alone than revert
to the kind of person I’d been, but I found myself wondering
whether I would end up being as monkish as my dad.
20 Nicholas Sparks
Knowing he couldn’t change my mind, Tony didn’t bother
hiding his disgust on his way out the door. “I just don’t get you
sometimes.”
When my dad picked me up from the airport, he didn’t recognize
me at fi rst and almost jumped when I tapped him on the shoulder.
He looked smaller than I remembered. Instead of offering a hug,
he shook my hand and asked me about the fl ight, but neither of
us knew what to say next, so we wandered outside. It was odd and
disorienting to be back at home, and I felt on edge, just like the
last time I took leave. In the parking lot, as I tossed my gear in the
trunk, I spotted on the back of his ancient Ford Escort a bumper
sticker that told people to support our troops. I wasn’t sure
exactly what that meant to my dad, but I was still glad to see it.
At home, I stowed my gear in my old bedroom. Everything was
where I remembered, right down to the dusty trophies on my shelf
and a hidden, half-empty bottle of Wild Turkey in the back of my
underwear drawer. Same thing in the rest of the house. The blanket
still covered the couch, the green refrigerator seemed to
scream that it didn’t belong, and the television picked up only
four blurry channels. Dad cooked spaghetti; Friday was always
spaghetti. At dinner, we tried to talk.
“It’s nice to be back,” I said.
His smile was brief. “Good,” he responded.
He took a drink of milk. At dinner, we always drank milk. He
concentrated on his meal.
“Do you remember Tony?” I ventured. “I think I mentioned him
in my letters. Anyway, get this—he thinks he’s in love. Her name’s
Sabine, and she has a six-year-old daughter. I’ve warned him that it
might not be such a good idea, but he isn’t listening.”
He carefully sprinkled Parmesan cheese over his food, making
sure every spot had the perfect amount. “Oh,” he said. “Okay.”
After that, I ate and neither of us said anything. I drank some
milk. I ate some more. The clock ticked on the wall.
DEAR JOHN 21
“I’ll bet you’re excited to be retiring this year,” I suggested.
“Just think, you can fi nally take a vacation, see the world.” I almost
said that he could come see me in Germany, but I didn’t. I
knew he wouldn’t and didn’t want to put him on the spot. We
twirled our noodles simultaneously as he seemed to ponder how
best to respond.
“I don’t know,” he fi nally said.
I gave up trying to talk to him, and from then on the only sounds
were those coming from our forks as they hit the plates. When we
fi nished dinner, we went our separate ways. Exhausted from the
fl ight, I headed off to bed, waking every hour the way I did back on
base. By the time I stirred in the morning, my dad was off at work.
I ate and read the paper, tried to contact a friend without success,
then grabbed my surfboard from the garage and hitched my way to
the beach. The waves weren’t great, but it didn’t matter. I hadn’t
been on a board in three years and was rusty at fi rst, but even the
little dribblers made me wish I had been stationed near the ocean.
It was early June 2000, the temperature was already hot, and
the water was refreshing. From my vantage point on my board, I
could see folks moving their belongings into some of the homes
just beyond the dunes. As I mentioned, Wrightsville Beach was
always crowded with families who rented for a week or more, but
occasionally college students from Chapel Hill or Raleigh did the
same. It was the latter who interested me, and I noted a group of
coeds in bikinis taking their spots on the back deck of one of the
houses near the pier. I watched them for a bit, appreciating the
view, then caught another wave and spent the rest of the afternoon
lost in my own little world.
I thought about paying a visit to Leroy’s but fi gured that nothing
or no one had changed except for me. Instead, I grabbed a bottle of
beer from the corner store and went to sit on the pier to enjoy the
sunset. Most of the people fi shing had already begun clearing out,
and the few who remained were cleaning their catch and tossing
the discards in the water. In time, the color of the ocean began
22 Nicholas Sparks
changing from iron gray to orange, then yellow. In the breakers
beyond the pier, I could see pelicans riding the backs of porpoises
as they skimmed through the waves. I knew that the evening would
bring the fi rst night of the full moon—my time in the fi eld made
the realization almost instinctive. I wasn’t thinking about much of
anything, just sort of letting my mind wander. Believe me, meeting
a girl was the last thing on my mind.
That was when I saw her walking up the pier. Or rather, two of
them walking. One was tall and blond, the other an attractive
brunette, both a little younger than me. College students, most
likely. Both wore shorts and halters, and the brunette was carrying
one of those big knit bags that people sometimes bring to the
beach when they plan to stay for hours with the kids. I could hear
them talking and laughing, sounding carefree and vacation-ready
as they approached.
“Hey,” I called out when they were close. Not very smooth, and
I can’t say I expected anything in response.
The blonde proved me right. She took one glimpse at my surfboard
and the beer in my hand and ignored me with a roll of her
eyes. The brunette, however, surprised me.
“Hiya, stranger,” she answered with a smile. She motioned
toward my board. “I’ll bet the waves were great today.”
Her comment caught me off guard, and I heard an unexpected
kindness in her words. She and her friend continued down to the
end of the pier, and I found myself watching her as she leaned over
the railing. I debated whether or not I should stroll over and introduce
myself, then decided against it. They weren’t my type, or
more accurately, I probably wasn’t theirs. I took a long pull on my
beer, trying to ignore them.
Try as I might, though, I couldn’t stop my gaze from drifting back
to the brunette. I tried not to listen to what the two girls were saying,
but the blonde had one of those voices impossible to ignore.
She was talking endlessly about some guy named Brad and how
much she loved him, and how her sorority was the best at UNC,
DEAR JOHN 23
and the party they had at the end of the year was the best ever, and
that the other should join next year, and that too many of her
friends were hooking up with the worst kind of frat guys, and one
of them even got pregnant, but it was her own fault since she’d been
warned about the guy. The brunette didn’t say much—I couldn’t
tell whether she was amused or bored by the conversation—but
every now and then, she would laugh. Again, I heard something
friendly and understanding in her voice, something akin to coming
home, which I’ll admit made no sense at all. As I set aside my
bottle of beer, I noticed that she’d placed her bag on the railing.
They had been standing there for ten minutes or so before two
guys started up the pier—frat guys, I guessed—wearing pink and
orange Lacoste shirts over their knee-length Bermuda shorts. My
fi rst thought was that one of these two must be the Brad that the
blonde had been talking about. Both carried beers, and they grew
furtive as they approached, as if intending to sneak up on the girls.
More than likely the two girls wanted them there, and after a quick
burst of surprise, complete with a scream and a couple of friendly
slaps on the arm, they’d all head back together, laughing and giggling
or doing whatever it was college couples did.
It may have turned out that way, too, for the boys did just what
I thought they would. As soon as they were close, they jumped at
the girls with a yell; both girls shrieked and did the friendly slap
thing. The guys hooted, and pink shirt spilled some of his beer. He
leaned against the railing, near the bag, one leg over the other, his
arms behind him.
“Hey, we’re going to be starting the bonfi re in a couple of minutes,”
orange shirt said, putting his arms around the blonde. He
kissed her neck. “You two ready to come back?”
“You ready?” the blonde asked, looking at her friend.
“Sure,” the brunette answered.
Pink shirt pushed back from the railing, but somehow his hand
must have hit the bag, because it slid, then tumbled over the edge.
The splash sounded like a fi sh jumping.
24 Nicholas Sparks
DEAR JOHN 25
“What was that?” he asked, turning around.
“My bag!” the brunette gasped. “You knocked it off.”
“Sorry about that,” he said, not sounding particularly sorry.
“My purse was in there!”
He frowned. “I said I’m sorry.”
“You’ve got to get it before it sinks!”
The frat brothers seemed frozen, and I knew neither of them
had any intention of jumping in to get it. For one thing, they’d
probably never fi nd it, and then they’d have to swim all the way
back to shore, something that wasn’t recommended when one
had been drinking, as they obviously had been. I think the brunette
read pink shirt’s expression as well, because I saw her put
both hands on the upper rail and one foot on the bottom.
“Don’t be dumb. It’s gone,” pink shirt declared, putting his
hand on hers to stop her. “It’s too dangerous to jump. There might
be sharks down there. It’s just a purse. I’ll buy you a new one.”
“I need that purse! It’s got all my money in there!”
It wasn’t any of my business, I knew. But all I could think as I
leapt to my feet and rushed toward the edge of the pier was, Oh,
what the hell. . . .
I suppose I should explain why I jumped into the waves
to retrieve her bag. It wasn’t that I thought she would view me as
some sort of hero, or because I wanted to impress her, or even
because I cared in the slightest how much money she’d lost. It had
to do with the genuineness of her smile and the warmth of her
laugh. Even as I was plunging into the water, I knew how ridiculous
my reaction was, but by then it was too late. I hit the water,
went under, and popped to the surface. Four faces stared down at
me from the railing. Pink shirt was defi nitely annoyed.
“Where is it?” I shouted up at them.
“Right over there!” the brunette shouted. “I think I can still see
it. It’s going down. . . .”
It took a minute to locate it in the deepening twilight, and the
surge of the ocean was doing its best to drive me into the pier. I
swam to the side, then held the bag above the water as best I could,
despite the fact that it was already soaking. The waves made the
swim back to shore less diffi cult than I’d feared, and every now and
then I’d look up and see the four people following along with me.
I fi nally felt bottom and trudged out of the surf. I shook the
water from my hair, started up the sand, and met them halfway up
the beach. I held out the bag.
Two
....Z....
DEAR JOHN 27
“Here you go.”
“Thank you,” the brunette said, and when her eyes met mine, I
felt something click, like a key turning in a lock. Believe me, I’m no
romantic, and while I’ve heard all about love at fi rst sight, I’ve never
believed in it, and I still don’t. But even so, there was something
there, something recognizably real, and I couldn’t look away.
Up close, she was more beautiful than I’d fi rst realized, but it had
less to do with the way she looked than the way she was. It wasn’t
just her slightly gap-toothed smile, it was the casual way she swiped
at a loose strand of hair, the easy way she held herself.
“You didn’t have to do that,” she said with something like wonder
in her voice. “I would have gotten it.”
“I know.” I nodded. “I saw you getting ready to jump.”
She tilted her head to the side. “But you felt an uncontrollable
need to help a lady in distress?”
“Something like that.”
She evaluated my answer for a moment, then turned her attention
to the bag. She began removing items—her wallet, sunglasses,
visor, a tube of sunscreen—and handed them all to the blonde
before wringing out the bag.
“Your pictures got wet,” said the blonde, fl icking through the
wallet.
The brunette ignored her, continuing to wring one way and then
the next. When she was fi nally satisfi ed, she took back the items
and reloaded her bag.
“Thank you again,” she said. Her accent was different from
that of eastern North Carolina, more of a twang, as if she’d grown
up in the mountains near Boone or near the South Carolina
border in the west.
“No big deal,” I mumbled, but I didn’t move.
“Hey, maybe he wants a reward,” pink shirt broke in, his voice
loud.
She glanced at him, then back at me. “Do you want a reward?”
“No.” I waved a hand. “Just glad to help.”
28 Nicholas Sparks
“I always knew chivalry wasn’t dead,” she proclaimed. I tried to
detect a note of teasing, but I heard nothing in her tone to indicate
that she was poking fun at me.
Orange shirt gave me the once-over, noting my crew cut. “Are
you in the marines?” he asked. He tightened his arms around the
blonde again.
I shook my head. “I’m not one of the few or the proud. I wanted
to be all that I could be, so I joined the army.”
The brunette laughed. Unlike my dad, she’d actually seen the
commercials.
“I’m Savannah,” she said. “Savannah Lynn Curtis. And these
are Brad, Randy, and Susan.” She held out her hand.
“I’m John Tyree,” I said, taking it. Her hand was warm, velvety
soft in places but callused in others. I was suddenly conscious of
how long it had been since I’d touched a woman.
“Well, I feel like I should do something for you.”
“You don’t need to do anything.”
“Have you eaten?” she asked, ignoring my comment. “We’re
getting ready to have a cookout, and there’s plenty to go around.
Would you like to join us?”
The guys traded glances. Pink-shirted Randy looked downright
glum, and I’ll admit that made me feel better. Hey, maybe he wants
a reward. What a putz.
“Yeah, come on,” Brad fi nally added, sounding less than thrilled.
“It’ll be fun. We’re renting the place next to the pier.” He pointed
to one of the houses on the beach, where half a dozen people
lounged on the deck out back.
Even though I had no desire to spend time with more frat
brothers, Savannah smiled at me with such warmth that the words
were out before I could stop them.
“Sounds good. Let me go grab my board from the pier and I’ll be
there in a bit.”
“We’ll meet you there,” Randy piped up. He took a step toward
Savannah, but she ignored him.
DEAR JOHN 29
“I’ll walk with you,” Savannah said, breaking away from the
group. “It’s the least I can do.” She adjusted the bag on her shoulder.
“See you all in a few, okay?”
We started toward the dune, where the stairs would lead us up
to the pier. Her friends lingered for a minute, but when she fell in
step beside me, they slowly turned and began making their way
down the beach. From the corner of my eye, I saw the blonde turn
her head and glance our way from beneath Brad’s arm. Randy did
too, sulking. I wasn’t sure that Savannah even noticed until we’d
walked a few steps.
“Susan probably thinks I’m crazy for doing this,” she said.
“Doing what?”
“Walking with you. She thinks Randy’s perfect for me, and she’s
been trying to get us together since we got here this afternoon.
He’s been following me around all day.”
I nodded, unsure how to respond. In the distance, the moon, full
and glowing, had begun its slow rise from the sea, and I saw Savannah
staring at it. When the waves crashed and spilled, they fl ared
silver, as if caught in a camera’s fl ash. We reached the pier. The
railing was gritty with sand and salt, and the wood was weathered
and beginning to splinter. The steps creaked as we ascended.
“Where are you stationed?” she asked.
“In Germany. I’m home on leave for a couple of weeks to visit
my dad. And you’re from the mountains, I take it?”
She glanced at me in surprise. “Lenoir.” She studied me. “Let me
guess, my accent, right? You think I sound like I’m from the sticks,
don’t you.”
“Not at all.”
“Well, I am. From the sticks, I mean. I grew up on a ranch and
everything. And yes, I know I have an accent, but I’ve been told
that some people fi nd it charming.”
“Randy seemed to think so.”
It slipped out before I could catch myself. In the awkward silence,
she ran a hand through her hair.
30 Nicholas Sparks
“Randy seems like a nice young man,” she remarked after a bit,
“but I don’t know him that well. I don’t really know most of the
people in the house all that well, except for Tim and Susan.” She
waved a mosquito away. “You’ll meet Tim later. He’s a great guy.
You’ll like him. Everybody does.”
“And you’re all down here on vacation for a week?”
“A month, actually—but no, it’s not really a vacation. We’re
volunteering. You’ve heard of Habitat for Humanity, right? We’re
down here to help build a couple of houses. My family’s been involved
with it for years.”
Over her shoulder, the house seemed to be coming to life in the
darkness. More people had materialized, the music had been
turned up, and every now and then I could hear laughter. Brad,
Susan, and Randy were already surrounded by a group of coeds
drinking beer and looking less like do-gooders than college kids
trolling for a good time and a chance to hook up with someone of
the opposite sex. She must have noticed my expression and followed
my gaze.
“We don’t start until Monday. They’ll fi nd out soon enough
that it’s not all fun and games.”
“I didn’t say anything. . . .”
“You didn’t have to. But you’re right. For most of them, it’s their
fi rst time working with Habitat, and they’re just doing it so they
have something different to put on their résumé when they
graduate. They have no idea how much work is actually involved.
In the end, though, all that matters is that the houses get built,
and they will. They always do.”
“You’ve done this before?”
“Every summer since I was sixteen. I used to do it with our church,
but when I went off to Chapel Hill, we started a group there. Well,
actually, Tim started it. He’s from Lenoir, too. He just graduated and
he’ll start on his master’s degree this fall. I’ve known him forever.
Instead of spending the summer working odd jobs at home or doing
internships, we thought we could offer students a chance to make a
DEAR JOHN 31
difference. Everyone chips in for the house and pays their own expenses
for the month, and we don’t charge anything for the labor we
do on the houses. That’s why it was so important that I get my bag
back. I wouldn’t have been able to eat all month.”
“I’m sure they wouldn’t have let you starve.”
“I know, but it wouldn’t be fair. They’re already doing something
worthy, and that’s more than enough.”
I could feel my feet slipping in the sand.
“Why Wilmington?” I asked. “I mean, why come here to build
houses, instead of somewhere like Lenoir or Raleigh?”
“Because of the beach. You know how people are. It’s hard
enough to get students to volunteer their time for a month, but
it’s easier if it’s in a place like this. And the more people you have,
the more you can do. Thirty people signed up this year.”
I nodded, conscious of how close together we were walking.
“And you graduated, too?”
“No, I’ll be a senior. And I’m majoring in special education, if
that’s your next question.”
“It was.”
“I fi gured. When you’re in college, that’s what everyone asks
you.”
“Everyone asks me if I like being in the army.”
“Do you?”
“I don’t know.”
She laughed, and the sound was so melodic that I knew I
wanted to hear it again.
We reached the end of the pier, and I grabbed my board. I
tossed the empty beer bottle into the garbage can, hearing it clank
to the bottom. Stars were coming out overhead, and the lights
from the houses outlined along the dunes reminded me of bright
jack-o’-lanterns.
“Do you mind if I ask what led you to join the army? Given that
you don’t know whether you like it, I mean.”
It took me a second to fi gure out how to answer that, and I
32 Nicholas Sparks
shifted my surfboard to my other arm. “I think it’s safest to say that
at the time, I needed to.”
She waited for me to add more, but when I didn’t, she simply
nodded.
“I’ll bet you’re glad to be back home for a little while,” she said.
“Without a doubt.”
“I’ll bet your father is glad, too, huh?”
“I think so.”
“He is. I’m sure he’s very proud of you.”
“I hope so.”
“You sound like you’re not certain.”
“You’d have to meet my dad to understand. He’s not much of a
talker.”
I could see the moonlight refl ected in her dark eyes, and her voice
was soft when she spoke. “He doesn’t have to talk to be proud of you.
He might be the kind of father who shows it in other ways.”
I thought about that, hoping it was true. While I considered it,
there was a loud scream from the house, and I caught sight of a
couple of coeds near the fi re. One of the guys had his arms wrapped
around a girl and was pushing her forward; she was laughing and
fi ghting him off. Brad and Susan were snuggling together nearby,
but Randy had vanished.
“You said you don’t know most of the people you’ll be living
with?”
She shook her head, her hair sweeping her shoulders. She swiped
at another strand. “Not too well. We met most of them for the fi rst
time at the sign-up, then again today when we got here. I mean, we
might have seen each other around campus now and then, and I
think a lot of them know each other already, but I don’t. Most of
them are in fraternities and sororities. I still live in a dorm. They’re
a nice bunch, though.”
As she answered, I got the feeling she was the kind of person who
would never say a bad thing about anyone. Her regard for others
struck me as refreshing and mature, and yet, strangely, I wasn’t
DEAR JOHN 33
surprised. It was part of that indefi nable quality I’d sensed about her
from the beginning, a manner that set her apart.
“How old are you?” I asked as we approached the house.
“Twenty-one. I just had a birthday last month. You?”
“Twenty-three. Do you have brothers and sisters?”
“No. I was an only child. Just me and my folks. My parents still
live in Lenoir, and they’re happy as clams after twenty-fi ve years.
Your turn.”
“The same. Except for me, it’s always been just me and my dad.”
I knew my answer would lead to a follow-up about the status of
my mother, but to my surprise, it didn’t come. Instead she asked,
“Was he the one who taught you to surf?”
“No, I picked that up on my own when I was a kid.”
“You’re good. I was watching you earlier. You made it look so
easy, graceful even. It made me wish I knew how.”
“I’d be happy to teach you if you want to learn,” I volunteered.
“It’s not that hard. I’ll be out tomorrow.”
She stopped and fi xed her gaze on me. “Now, don’t make offers
you’re not sure you intend to keep.” She reached for my arm, leaving
me speechless, then motioned toward the bonfi re. “You ready to
meet some people?”
I swallowed, feeling a sudden dryness in my throat, which was
just about the strangest thing that had ever happened to me.
The house was one of those big three-storied monsters with the
garage on the bottom and probably six or seven bedrooms. A massive
deck circled the main level; towels were slung over the railings,
and I could hear the sound of multiple conversations coming
from all directions. A grill stood on the deck, and I could smell
the hot dogs and chicken cooking; the guy leaning over it was
shirtless and wearing a do-rag, trying to come across as urban cool.
It wasn’t working, but it did make me laugh.
On the sand out front, the fi re was set into a pit, with several girls
in oversize sweatshirts seated in chairs circling it, all pretending to
34 Nicholas Sparks
be oblivious to the boys around them. Meanwhile, the guys stood
just beyond them, looking as if they were trying to pose in a way
that accentuated the size of their arms or sculpted abs and acting as
if they didn’t notice the girls at all. I’d seen all this at Leroy’s before;
educated or not, kids were still kids. They were in their early
twenties, and lust was in the air. Throw in the beach and beer,
and I could guess what would happen later; but I would be long
gone by then.
When Savannah and I drew near, she slowed before pointing.
“How about over there, by the dune?” she suggested.
“Sure.”
We took a seat facing the fi re. A few of the other girls stared,
checking out the new guy, before retreating into their conversations.
Randy fi nally wandered toward the fi re with a beer, saw Savannah
and me, and quickly turned his back, following the example
of the girls.
“Chicken or hot dog?” she asked, seemingly oblivious to all of
this.
“Chicken.”
“What do you want to drink?”
The fi relight made her look newly mysterious. “Whatever
you’re having’s fi ne. Thanks.”
“I’ll be right back.”
She headed toward the steps, and I forced myself not to follow.
Instead I walked toward the fi re, slipped off my shirt, and laid it
over an empty chair, then returned to my seat. Glancing up, I saw
do-rag fl irting with Savannah, felt a surge of tension, then turned
away to get a better grip on things. I knew little about her and
knew even less about what she thought of me. Besides, I had no
desire to start something I couldn’t fi nish. I was leaving in a couple
of weeks, and none of this would amount to anything. I told myself
all those things, and I think I partially convinced myself that I’d
head home just as soon as I fi nished eating, when my thoughts were
interrupted by the sight of someone approaching. Tall and lanky,
DEAR JOHN 35
with dark hair that was already receding parted neatly to the side,
he reminded me of those guys you met from time to time who
looked middle-aged from birth.
“You must be John,” he said with a smile, squatting in front of me.
“My name’s Tim Wheddon.” He extended his hand. “I heard what
you did for Savannah—I know she was grateful you were there.”
I shook his hand. “It’s nice to meet you.”
Despite my initial wariness, his smile was more genuine than
either Brad’s or Randy’s had been. Nor did he mention my tattoos,
which was unusual. I suppose I should mention they weren’t exactly
small and covered most of my arms. People have told me I’ll regret
it when I’m older, but at the time I got them, I really didn’t care. I
still don’t.
“Do you mind if I take a seat?” he asked.
“Help yourself.”
He made himself comfortable, neither crowding me nor sitting
too far away. “I’m glad you could come. I mean, it’s not much, but
the food’s good. Are you hungry?”
“Actually, I’m starved.”
“Surfi ng will do that to you.”
“Do you surf?”
“No, but spending time in the ocean always makes me hungry. I
remember that from being on vacation as a kid. We used to go to
Pine Knoll Shores every summer. Have you been there?”
“Only once. I had all I needed here.”
“Yeah, I suppose you did.” He motioned to my board. “You like
the long boards, huh?”
“I like ’em both, but the waves here are better suited for the
long ones. You need to ride in the Pacifi c to really enjoy a short
board.”
“Have you been there? Hawaii, Bali, New Zealand, places like
that? I’ve read they’re the ultimate.”
“Not yet,” I said, surprised he’d know about them. “One day,
maybe.”
36 Nicholas Sparks
A log crackled, sending small sparks up to the sky. I brought my
hands together, knowing it was my turn. “I hear you’re here to build
some homes for the poor.”
“Did Savannah tell you that? Yeah, that’s the plan, anyway.
They’re for a couple of really deserving families, and hopefully
they’ll be in their own homes by the end of July.”
“That’s a good thing you’re doing.”
“It’s not just me. But hey, I wanted to ask you something.”
“Let me guess, you want me to volunteer?”
He laughed. “No, nothing like that. That’s funny, though—I’ve
heard that before. People see me coming and usually they run the
other way. I guess I’m way too easy to read. Anyway, I know it’s a
long shot, but I was wondering if you know my cousin. He’s stationed
at Fort Bragg.”
“Sorry,” I said. “I’m posted in Germany.”
“At Ramstein?”
“No. That’s the air force base. But I’m relatively close. Why?”
“I was in Frankfurt last December. I spent Christmas there with
my family. That’s where we’re originally from, and my grandparents
still live there.”
“Small world.”
“Have you learned any German?”
“Not a bit.”
“Me neither. The sad thing is, my parents are fl uent and I’ve
heard it at home for years, and I even took a class in it before I
went. But I just didn’t get it, you know? I think I was lucky to pass
the class, and all I could do was nod at the dinner table and pretend
I understood what everyone was saying. The only saving grace was
that my brother was in the same boat, so we could feel like morons
together.”
I laughed. He had an open, honest face, and despite myself, I
liked him.
“Hey, can I get you anything?” he asked.
“Savannah’s taking care of it.”
DEAR JOHN 37
“I should have guessed. Perfect hostess and all that. Always has
been.”
“She said you two grew up together?”
He nodded. “Her family’s ranch is right next to ours. We went
to the same schools and attended the same church for years, and
then we were at the same university. She’s kind of like my little
sister. She’s special.”
Despite the sister comment, I got the impression by the way he
said “special” that his feelings ran a little deeper than he was letting
on. But unlike Randy, he didn’t seem at all jealous about the
fact that she’d invited me here. Before I could puzzle over it, Savannah
appeared on the stairs and stepped onto the sand.
“I see you met Tim,” she said, nodding. In one hand were two
plates with chicken, potato salad, and chips; in the other were two
cans of Diet Pepsi.
“Yeah, I just wanted to come over and thank him for what he did,”
Tim explained, “then decided to bore him with family stories.”
“Good. I was hoping you two would have a chance to meet.”
She held up her hands; like Tim, she ignored the fact that I was
shirtless. “The food’s ready. Would you like my plate, Tim? I can
go up and get another.”
“Nah, I’ll get it,” Tim said, standing. “Thanks, though. I’ll let you
two dig in.” He brushed the sand from his shorts. “Hey, it was nice
meeting you, John. If you’re in the area again tomorrow or whenever,
you’re always welcome.”
“Thanks. Nice meeting you, too.”
A moment later, Tim was heading up the stairs. He didn’t look
back, merely called out a friendly hello to someone going in the
opposite direction, then bounded up the rest of the way.
Savannah handed me the plate and some plastic utensils,
switched hands and offered me a soda, then took a seat beside me.
Close, I noticed, but not quite close enough to touch. She propped
her plate on her lap, then reached for her can before hesitating.
She held up the can.
38 Nicholas Sparks
“You were drinking beer earlier, but you said to get whatever I
was getting, so I brought you one of these. I wasn’t quite sure what
you wanted.”
“The soda’s fi ne.”
“You sure? There’s plenty of beer in the coolers, and I’ve heard
about you army guys.”
I snorted. “I’m sure,” I said, opening my can. “I take it you don’t
drink.”
“I don’t,” she said. No defensiveness or smugness in her tone, I
noted, just the truth. I liked that.
She ate a bite of her chicken. I did the same, and in the silence,
I wondered about her and Tim and whether she was aware of how
he really felt about her. And I wondered how she felt about him.
There was something there, but I couldn’t fi gure it out, unless Tim
was right and it was a sibling-type thing. I somehow doubted that
was the case.
“What do you do in the army?” she asked, fi nally putting down
her fork.
“I’m a sergeant in the infantry. Weapons squad.”
“What’s it like? I mean, what do you do every day? Do you shoot
guns, or blow things up, or what?”
“Sometimes. But actually, it’s pretty boring most of the time, at
least when we’re on base. We assemble in the morning, usually
around six or so, make sure everyone’s there, and then we break
into squads to exercise. Basketball, running, weight lifting, whatever.
Sometimes there’s a class that day, anything from assembling
and reassembling our weapons, or a night-terrain class, or we
might head to the rifl e range, or whatever. If nothing’s planned,
we just head back to the barracks and play video games or read or
work out again or whatever for the rest of the day. Then we reassemble
at four o’clock and fi nd out what we’re doing tomorrow.
Then we’re done.”
“Video games?”
DEAR JOHN 39
“I work out and read. But my buddies are experts at games. And
the more violent the game, the more they like it.”
“What do you read?”
I told her, and she considered it. “And what happens when
you’re sent to a war zone?”
“Then,” I said, fi nishing my chicken, “it’s different. There’s
guard duty, and things are always breaking and need to be fi xed,
so you’re busy, even when you’re not out on patrol. But the infantry
are the forces on the ground, so we spend a big chunk of our
time away from camp.”
“Do you ever get scared?”
I searched for the right answer. “Yeah. Sometimes. It’s not like
you’re walking around terrifi ed all the time, even when things are
going to hell all around you. It’s just that you’re . . . reacting, trying
to stay alive. Things are happening so fast that you don’t have time
to think much of anything except doing your job and trying not to
die. It usually affects you afterward, once you’re clear. That’s when
you realize how close you came, and sometimes you get the shakes
or puke or whatever.”
“I’m not sure I could do what you do.”
I wasn’t sure if she expected a response to that, so I switched
topics. “Why special education?” I asked.
“It’s kind of a long story. You sure you want to hear it?”
When I nodded, she drew a long breath.
“There’s this boy in Lenoir named Alan, and I’ve known him all
my life. He’s autistic, and for a long time no one knew what to do with
him or how to get through to him. And it just got to me, you know?
I felt so bad for him, even when I was little. When I asked my parents
about it, they said that maybe the Lord had special plans for him. It
didn’t make any sense at fi rst, but Alan had an older brother who was
so patient with him all the time. I mean always. He never got frustrated
with him, and little by little, he helped Alan. Alan’s not perfect
by any stretch—he still lives with his parents, and he’ll never be
40 Nicholas Sparks
on his own—but he’s not as lost as he was when he was younger, and
I just decided that I wanted to be able to help kids like Alan.”
“How old were you when you decided that?”
“Twelve.”
“And you want to work with them in a school?”
“No,” she said. “I want to do what Alan’s brother did. He used
horses.” She paused, collecting her thoughts. “With autistic kids . . .
it’s like they’re locked into their own little worlds, so usually school
and therapy are based on routine. But I want to show them experiences
that can open new doors for them. I’ve seen it happen. I mean,
Alan was terrifi ed of the horses at fi rst, but his brother kept trying,
and after a while, Alan got to the point where he would pat them or
rub their noses, then later even feed them. After that, he started to
ride, and I remember watching his face the fi rst time he was up there
. . . it was just so incredible, you know? I mean, he was smiling, just
as happy as a kid could be. And that’s what I want these kids to experience.
Just . . . happiness, even if it’s only for a short while. That’s
when I knew exactly what I wanted to do with my life. Maybe open
a riding camp for autistic kids, where we can really work with them.
So maybe they can feel that same happiness that Alan did.”
She put down her fork as if embarrassed, then set her plate off
to the side.
“That sounds wonderful.”
“We’ll see if it happens,” she said, sitting up again. “It’s just a
dream for now.”
“I take it you like horses, too?”
“All girls love horses. Don’t you know that? But yes, I do. I have
an Arabian named Midas, and it kills me sometimes that I’m here
when I could be off riding him.”
“The truth comes out.”
“As it should. But I’m still planning to stay here. I’ll ride all day,
every day, when I get back. Do you ride?”
“I did once.”
“Did you like it?”
DEAR JOHN 41
“I was sore the next day. It hurt to walk.”
She giggled, and I realized I liked talking to her. It was easy and
natural, unlike with so many people. Above me, I could see Orion’s
belt; just over the horizon on the water, Venus had appeared and
glowed a heavy white. Guys and girls continued to tramp up and
down the stairs, fl irting with booze-induced courage. I sighed.
“I should probably get going so I can visit with my dad for a while.
He’s probably wondering where I am. If he’s still awake, that is.”
“Do you want to call him? You can use the phone.”
“No, I think I’ll just head out. It’s a long walk.”
“You don’t have a car?”
“No. I hitched a ride this morning.”
“Do you want Tim to drive you home? I’m sure he won’t mind.”
“No, that’s okay.”
“Don’t be ridiculous. You said it was a long walk, right? I’ll have
Tim drive you. Let me get him.”
She raced off before I could stop her, and a minute later Tim
was following her out of the house. “Tim is happy to take you,”
she said, looking way too pleased with herself.
I turned toward Tim. “You sure?”
“No problem at all,” he assured me. “My truck’s out front. You
can just put your board in the back.” He motioned to the board.
“Need a hand?”
“No,” I said, rising, “I got it.” I went to the chair and slipped on
my shirt, then picked up my board. “Thanks, by the way.”
“My pleasure,” he said. He patted his pocket. “I’ll be back in a
second with the keys. It’s the green truck parked on the grass. I’ll
meet you out front.”
When he was gone, I turned back to Savannah. “It was nice
meeting you.”
She held my gaze. “You too. I’ve never hung out with a soldier
before. I felt sort of . . . protected. I don’t think Randy’ll give me
any trouble tonight. Your tattoos probably scared him away.”
I guess she had noticed them. “Maybe I’ll see you around.”
42 Nicholas Sparks
“You know where I’ll be.”
I wasn’t sure whether that meant she wanted me to come visit
again or didn’t. In many ways, she remained a complete mystery to
me. Then again, I barely knew her at all.
“But I am a little disappointed that you forgot,” she added, almost
as an afterthought.
“Forgot what?”
“Didn’t you say that you’d teach me how to surf?”
If Tim had any inkling of the effect Savannah had on me or that I’d
be visiting again the next day, he gave no indication. Instead he
focused mainly on the drive, making sure he was heading in the
right direction. He was the kind of driver who stopped the car even
when the light was yellow and he could have sailed through.
“I hope you had a good time,” he said. “I know it’s always
strange when you don’t know anyone.”
“I did.”
“You and Savannah really hit it off. She’s something, isn’t she? I
think she liked you.”
“We had a nice conversation,” I said.
“I’m glad. I was a little worried about her coming down here. Last
year her parents were with us, so this is the fi rst time she’s been on
her own like this. I know she’s a big girl, but these aren’t the kind
of people she usually hangs out with, and the last thing I wanted
was for her to be fending off guys all night.”
“I’m sure she could have handled it.”
“You’re probably right. But I get the feeling that some of these
guys are pretty persistent.”
“Of course they are. They’re guys.”
He laughed. “I guess you’re right.” He motioned toward the
window. “Which way now?”
I directed him through a series of turns, then fi nally I told him
to slow the car. He stopped in front of the house, where I could
see the light from my dad’s den, glowing yellow.
DEAR JOHN 43
“Thanks for the ride,” I said, opening my door.
“No problem.” He leaned over the seat. “And listen, like I said,
feel free to stop by the house anytime. We work during the week,
but weekends and evenings are usually clear.”
“I’ll keep that in mind,” I promised.
Once inside, I went to my dad’s den and opened the door. He was
peering at the Greysheet and jumped. I realized he hadn’t heard
me come in.
“Sorry,” I said, taking a seat on the single step that separated
the den from the rest of the house. “Didn’t mean to scare you.”
“It’s okay,” was all he said. He debated whether to set aside the
Greysheet, then did.
“The waves were great today,” I commented. “I’d almost forgotten
how fantastic the water feels.”
He smiled but again said nothing. I shifted slightly on the step.
“How’d work go?” I asked.
“The same,” he said.
He lapsed back into his own thoughts, and all I could think was
that the same thing could be said about our conversations.
Surfi ng is a solitary sport, one in which long stretches
of boredom are interspersed with frantic activity, and it teaches
you to fl ow with nature, instead of fi ghting it . . . it’s about getting
in the zone. That’s what the surfi ng magazines say, anyway, and I
mostly agree. There’s nothing quite as exciting as catching a wave
and living within a wall of water as it rolls toward shore. But I’m
not like a lot of those dudes with freeze-dried skin and stringy hair
who do it all day, every day, because they think it’s the be-all and
end-all of existence. It isn’t. For me, it’s more about the fact that
the world is crazy noisy almost all the time, and when you’re out
there, it’s not. You’re able to hear yourself think.”
This is what I was telling Savannah, anyway, as we made our way
toward the ocean early Sunday morning. At least, that’s what I
thought I was saying. For the most part, I was just sort of rambling,
trying not to be too obvious about the fact that I really liked the
way she looked in a bikini.
“Like horseback riding,” she said.
“Huh?”
“Hearing yourself think. That’s why I like riding, too.”
I’d shown up a few minutes earlier. The best waves were usually
early in the morning, and it was one of those clear, blue-sky days
Three
....Z....
portending heat that meant the beach would be packed again.
Savannah had been sitting on the steps out back, wrapped in a
towel, the remains of the bonfi re before her. Despite the fact that
the party had no doubt gone on for hours after I’d left, there wasn’t
a single empty can or piece of trash anywhere. My impression of
the group improved a bit.
Despite the hour, the air was already warm. We spent a few minutes
in the sand near the water’s edge going over the basics of surfing,
and I explained how to pop up on the board. When Savannah
thought she was ready, I waded in carrying the board, walking beside
her.
There were only a few surfers out, the same ones I’d seen the
day before. I was trying to fi gure out the best place to bring Savannah
so she’d have enough room when I realized I could no
longer see her.
“Hold on, hold on!” she shouted from behind me. “Stop, stop . . .”
I turned. Savannah was on her tiptoes as the fi rst splashes of
water hit her belly, and her upper body was immediately covered
in goosefl esh. She appeared to be trying to lift herself from the
water.
“Let me get used to this. . . .” She gave a few quick, audible
gasps and crossed her arms. “Wow. This is really cold. Holy cow!”
Holy cow? It wasn’t exactly something my buddies would say.
“You’ll get used to it,” I said, smirking.
“I don’t like being cold. I hate being cold.”
“You live in the mountains where it snows.”
“Yeah, but we have these things called jackets and gloves and
hats that we wear to keep warm. And we don’t thrust ourselves
into arctic waters fi rst thing in the morning.”
“Funny,” I said.
She continued to hop up and down. “Yeah, real funny. I mean,
geez!”
Geez? I grinned. Her breathing gradually began to even out, but
the goosefl esh was still there. She took another tiny step forward.
DEAR JOHN 45
46 Nicholas Sparks
“It works best if you just jump right in and go under instead of
torturing yourself in stages,” I suggested.
“You do it your way, I’ll do it mine,” she said, unimpressed with
my wisdom. “I can’t believe you wanted to come out now. I was
thinking sometime in the afternoon, when the temperature was
above freezing.”
“It’s almost eighty degrees.”
“Yeah, yeah,” she said, fi nally acclimating. Uncrossing her arms,
she took another series of breaths, then dipped maybe an inch.
Steeling herself, she slapped a bit of water on her arms. “Okay, I
think I’m getting there.”
“Don’t rush for me. Really. Take your time.”
“I will, thank you,” she said, ignoring the teasing tone. “Okay,”
she said again, more to herself than me. She took a small step forward,
then another. As she moved, her face was a mask of concentration,
and I liked the way it looked. So serious, so intense. So
ridiculous.
“Quit laughing at me,” she said, noting my expression.
“I’m not laughing.”
“I can see it in your face. You’re laughing on the inside.”
“All right, I’ll stop.”
Eventually she waded out to join me, and when the water was up
to my shoulders, Savannah climbed on the board. I held it in place,
trying again not to stare at her fi gure, which wasn’t easy, considering
it was right in front of me. I forced myself to monitor the swells
behind us.
“Now what?”
“Do you remember what to do? Paddle hard, grab the board on
both sides near the front, then pop up to your feet?”
“Got it.”
“It’s kind of tough at fi rst. Don’t be surprised if you fall, but if
you do, just roll with it. It usually takes a few times to get it.”
“Okay,” she said, and I saw a small swell approaching.
“Get ready . . . ,” I said, timing it. “Okay, start paddling. . . .”
As the wave hit us, I pushed the board, giving it some momentum,
and Savannah caught the wave. I don’t know what I expected,
except that it wasn’t to see her pop straight up, keep her
balance, and ride the wave all the way back to shore, where it
fi nally petered out. In the shallow water, she jumped off the board
as it slowed and turned with dramatic fl air toward me.
“How was that?” she called out.
Despite the distance between us, I couldn’t look away. Oh man,
I suddenly thought, I’m in real trouble.
“I did gymnastics for years,” she admitted. “I’ve always had a good
sense of balance. I suppose I should have said something about
that while you were telling me I was going to wipe out.”
We spent more than an hour in the water. She popped up every
time and rode the waves to shore with ease; though she couldn’t
steer the board, I had no doubt that if she wanted to, she would be
able to master that in no time.
Afterward, we returned to the house. I waited out back while
she went upstairs. While a few people had risen—three girls
were on the deck staring at the ocean—most were still recovering
from the night before and nowhere to be seen. Savannah
emerged a couple of minutes later in shorts and a T-shirt, holding
two cups of coffee. She sat beside me on the steps as we faced
the water.
“I didn’t say you’d wipe out,” I clarifi ed. “I just said that if you did,
you should roll with it.”
“Uh-huh,” she said, her expression mischievous. She pointed
to my cup. “Is your coffee okay?”
“Tastes great,” I said.
“I have to start my day with coffee. It’s my one vice.”
“Everyone’s got to have one.”
She glanced at me. “What’s yours?”
“I don’t have any,” I answered, and she surprised me by giving
me a playful nudge.
DEAR JOHN 47
“Did you know that last night was the fi rst night of the full
moon?”
I did but thought it best not to admit it. “Really?” I said.
“I’ve always loved full moons. Ever since I was a kid. I liked to
think that they were an omen of sorts. I wanted to believe they
always portended good things. Like if I was making a mistake, I
would have the chance to start over.”
She said nothing else about it. Instead she brought the cup to
her lips, and I watched as the steam wreathed her face.
“What’s on your agenda today?” I asked.
“We’re supposed to have a meeting sometime today, but other
than that, nothing. Well, except for church. For me, I mean.
And, well, whoever else wants to go. Which reminds me—what
time is it?”
I checked my watch. “A little after nine.”
“Already? I guess that doesn’t give me much time. Service is
at ten.”
I nodded, knowing our time together was almost up.
“Do you want to go with me?” I heard her ask.
“To church?”
“Yeah. To church,” she said. “Don’t you go?”
I wasn’t sure what to say. It was obviously important to her, and
though I got the impression that my answer would disappoint, I
didn’t want to lie. “Not really,” I admitted. “I haven’t been to
church in years. I mean, I used to go as a kid, but . . .” I trailed off.
“I don’t know why,” I fi nished.
She stretched her legs out, waiting to see if I would add more.
When I didn’t, she arched an eyebrow. “So?”
“What?”
“Do you want to go with me or not?”
“I don’t have any clothes. I mean, this is all I have, and I doubt
if I have enough time to go home, shower, and get back in time.
Otherwise I would.”
48 Nicholas Sparks
She gave me the once-over. “Good.” She patted my knee, the
second time she’d touched me. “I’ll get you some clothes.”
“You look great,” Tim assured me. “The collar’s a little snug, but I
don’t think anyone will be able to tell.”
In the mirror, I saw a stranger dressed in khakis and a pressed
shirt and tie. I couldn’t remember the last time I’d worn a tie. I
wasn’t sure I was happy about any of this or not. Tim, meanwhile,
was way too chipper about the whole thing.
“How’d she talk you into this?” he asked.
“I have no idea.”
He laughed and, leaning over to tie his shoes, winked. “I told
you she likes you.”
We’ve got chaplains in the army, and most of them are pretty good
guys. On base, I got to know a couple of them fairly well, and one
of them—Ted Jenkins—was the kind of guy you trusted on the spot.
He didn’t drink, and I’m not saying he was one of us, but he was
always welcome when he showed up. He had a wife and a couple of
rugrats, and he’d been in the service for fi fteen years. He had personal
experience when it came to struggles with family and military
life in general, and if you ever sat down to talk with him, he really
listened. You couldn’t tell him everything—he was an offi cer, after
all—and he ended up coming down fairly hard on a couple of guys
in my platoon who admitted their escapades a bit too freely, but the
thing was, he had this kind of presence that made you want to tell
him anyway. I don’t know what it was other than the fact that he
was a good man and a hell of an army chaplain. He talked about
God just as naturally as you might talk about your friend, not in that
preachy, irritating way that generally turns me off. Nor did he
press you to attend services on Sundays. He sort of left it up to you,
and depending what was going on or how dangerous things got, he
might fi nd himself talking to either one or two people or a hun-
DEAR JOHN 49
dred. Before my platoon was sent to the Balkans, he probably baptized
fi fty people.
I’d been baptized as a kid, so I didn’t go that route, but like I said,
it had been a long time since I’d been to service. I’d stopped going
with my dad a long time ago, and I didn’t know what to expect. Nor
can I honestly say I was looking forward to it, but in the end, the
service wasn’t that bad. The pastor was low-key, the music was all
right, and time didn’t drag by the way it always seemed to when I
was little. I’m not saying I got much out of it, but even so, I was glad
I went, if only so I could talk about something new with my dad.
And also because it gave me just a bit more time with Savannah.
Savannah ended up sitting between Tim and me, and I watched
her from the corner of my eye as she sang. She had a quiet, low-key
singing voice but was always in tune, and I liked the way it sounded.
Tim stayed focused on the scriptures, and on the way out, he
stopped to visit with the pastor while Savannah and I waited in the
shade of a dogwood tree out front. Tim looked animated as he chatted
with the pastor.
“Old friends?” I asked, nodding toward Tim. Despite the shade,
I was getting hot and could feel trails of perspiration beginning
to form.
“No. I think his dad was the one who told him about this pastor.
He had to use MapQuest last night to fi nd this place.” She fanned
herself; in her sundress, she reminded me of a proper southern
belle. “I’m glad you came.”
“So am I,” I agreed.
“Are you hungry?”
“Getting there.”
“We have some food back at the house, if you want some. And
you can give Tim his clothes back. I can tell you’re hot and uncomfortable.”
“It’s not half as hot as helmets, boots, and body armor, trust
me.”
She tilted her head up at me. “I like hearing you talk about
50 Nicholas Sparks
body armor. Not a lot of guys in my classes talk like you. I fi nd it
interesting.”
“You teasing me?”
“Just noting for the record.” She leaned gracefully against the
tree. “I think Tim’s fi nishing up.”
I followed her gaze, noticing nothing different. “How can you
tell?”
“See how he brought his hands together? That means he’s getting
ready to say good-bye. In just a second, he’s going to put his hand
out, he’ll smile and nod, and then he’ll be on his way.”
I watched Tim do exactly as she predicted and amble toward us.
I noted her amused expression. She shrugged. “When you live in
a small town like mine, there’s not much to do other than watch
people. You begin to see patterns after a while.”
There’d probably been too much Tim-watching in my humble
opinion, but I wasn’t about to admit it.
“Hey there . . .” Tim raised a hand. “You two ready to head
back?”
“We’ve been waiting for you,” she pointed out.
“Sorry,” he said. “We just got to talking.”
“You just get to talking with anyone and everyone.”
“I know,” he said. “I’m working on being more standoffi sh.”
She laughed, and while their familiar banter put me momentarily
outside their circle of intimacy, all was forgotten when Savannah
looped her arm through mine on our way back toward the car.
Everyone was up by the time we got back, and most were already in
their bathing suits and working on their tans. Some were lounging
on the upper deck; most were clustered together on the beach out
back. Music blasted from a stereo inside the house, coolers of beer
stood refi lled and ready, and more than a few were drinking: the
age-old cure for the hangover headache. I passed no judgment; a
beer sounded good, actually, but given that I’d just been to church,
I fi gured I should pass.
DEAR JOHN 51
I changed my clothes, folding Tim’s the way I’d learned in the
army, then returned to the kitchen. Tim had made a plate of
sandwiches.
“Help yourself,” he said, gesturing. “We have tons of food. I
should know—I’m the one who spent three hours shopping yesterday.”
He rinsed his hands and dried them on a towel. “All
right. Now it’s my turn to change. Savannah will be out in a
minute.”
He left the kitchen. Alone, I looked around. The house was
decorated in that traditional beachy way: lots of bright-colored
wicker furniture, lamps made with seashells, small statues of lighthouses
above the mantel, pastel paintings of the coast.
Lucy’s parents had owned a place like this. Not here, but on
Bald Head Island. They never rented it out, preferring to spend
their summers there. Of course, the old man still had to work in
Winston-Salem, and he and the wife would head back for a
couple of days a week, leaving poor Lucy all alone. Except for me,
of course. Had they known what was happening on those days,
they probably wouldn’t have left us alone.
“Hey there,” Savannah said. She’d donned her bikini again,
though she was wearing shorts over the bottoms. “I see you’re back
to normal.”
“How can you tell?”
“Your eyes aren’t bulging because your collar’s too tight.”
I smiled. “Tim made some sandwiches.”
“Great. I’m starved,” she said, moving around the kitchen. “Did
you grab one?”
“Not yet,” I said.
“Well, dig in. I hate to eat alone.”
We stood in the kitchen as we ate. The girls lying on the deck
hadn’t realized we were there, and I could hear one of them talking
about what she did with one of the guys last night, and none
of it sounded as though she were in town on a goodwill mission
for the poor. Savannah wrinkled her nose as if to say, Way too
52 Nicholas Sparks
much information, then turned to the fridge. “I need a drink. Do
you want something?”
“Water’s fi ne.”
She bent over to grab a couple of bottles. I tried not to stare but
did so anyway and, frankly, enjoyed it. I wondered whether she
knew I was staring and assumed she did, for when she stood up and
turned around, she had that amused look again. She set the bottles
on the counter. “After this, you want to go surfi ng again?”
How could I resist?
We spent the afternoon in the water. As much as I enjoyed the
up-close-Savannah-lying-on-the-board view I was treated to, I enjoyed
the sight of her surfi ng even more. To make things even better,
she asked to watch me while she warmed up on the beach, and I was
treated to my own private viewing while enjoying the waves.
By midafternoon we were lying on towels near, but not too
near, the rest of the group behind the house. A few curious glances
drifted in our direction, but for the most part, no one seemed to
care that I was there, except for Randy and Susan. Susan frowned
pointedly at Savannah; Randy, meanwhile, was content to hang
out with Brad and Susan as the third wheel, licking his wounds.
Tim was nowhere to be seen.
Savannah was lying on her stomach, a tempting sight. I was on
my back beside her, trying to doze in the lazy heat but too distracted
by her presence to fully relax.
“Hey,” she murmured. “Tell me about your tattoos.”
I rolled my head in the sand. “What about them?”
“I don’t know. Why you got them, what they mean.”
I propped myself on one elbow. I pointed to my left arm, which
had an eagle and banner. “Okay, this is the infantry insignia, and
this”—I pointed to the words and letters—“is how we’re identifi
ed: company, battalion, regiment. Everyone in my squad has one.
We got it just after basic training at Fort Benning in Georgia when
we were celebrating.”
DEAR JOHN 53
“Why does it say ‘Jump-start’ underneath it?”
“That’s my nickname. I got it during basic training, courtesy of
our beloved drill sergeant. I wasn’t putting my gun together fast
enough, and he basically said that he was going to jump-start a certain
body part if I didn’t get my act in gear. The nickname stuck.”
“He sounds pleasant,” she joked.
“Oh yeah. We called him Lucifer behind his back.”
She smiled. “What’s the barbed wire above it for?”
“Nothing,” I said, shaking my head. “I had that one done before
I joined.”
“And the other arm?”
A Chinese character. I didn’t want to go into it, so I shook my
head. “It’s from back in my ‘I’m lost and don’t give a damn’ stage.
It doesn’t mean anything.”
“Isn’t it a Chinese character?”
“Yes.”
“Then what does it mean? It’s got to mean something. Like
bravery or honor or something?”
“It’s a profanity.”
“Oh,” she said with a blink.
“Like I said, it doesn’t mean anything to me now.”
“Except that maybe you shouldn’t fl ash it if you ever go to
China.”
I laughed. “Yeah, except that,” I agreed.
She was quiet for a moment. “You were a rebel, huh?”
I nodded. “A long time ago. Well, not really that long ago. But
it seems like it.”
“That’s what you meant when you said the army was something
you needed at the time?”
“It’s been good for me.”
She thought about it. “Tell me—would you have jumped for my
bag back then?”
“No. I probably would have laughed at what happened.”
She evaluated my answer, as if wondering whether to believe me.
54 Nicholas Sparks
Finally, she drew a long breath. “I’m glad you joined, then. I really
needed that bag.”
“Good.”
“What else?”
“What else what?”
“What else can you tell me about yourself?”
“I don’t know. What do you want to know?”
“Tell me something no one else knows about you.”
I considered the question. “I can tell you how many ten-dollar
Indians with a rolled edge were minted in 1907.”
“How many?”
“Forty-two. They were never intended for the public. Some
men at the mint made them for themselves and some friends.”
“You like coins?”
“I’m not sure. It’s a long story.”
“We’ve got time.”
I hesitated while Savannah reached for her bag. “Hold on,” she
said, rummaging through it. She pulled out a tube of Coppertone.
“You can tell me after you put some lotion on my back. I feel like
I’m getting burned.”
“Oh, I can, huh?”
She winked. “It’s part of the deal.”
I applied the lotion to her back and shoulders and probably went
a bit overboard, but I convinced myself that she was turning pink
and that having a sunburn of any sort would make her work the
next day miserable. After that, I spent the next few minutes telling
her about my grandfather and dad, about the coin shows and good
old Eliasberg. What I didn’t do was specifi cally answer her question,
for the simple reason that I wasn’t quite sure what the answer
was. When I fi nished she turned to me.
“And your father still collects coins?”
“All the time. At least, I think so. We don’t talk about coins
anymore.”
“Why not?”
DEAR JOHN 55
I told her that story, too. Don’t ask me why. I knew I should
have been putting my best foot forward and tossing out crap to
impress her, but with Savannah that wasn’t possible. For whatever
reason, she made me want to tell the truth, even though I barely
knew her. When I fi nished she was wearing a curious expression.
“Yeah, I was a jerk,” I offered, knowing there were other, probably
more accurate words to describe me back then, all of which were
profane enough to offend her.
“It sounds like it,” she said, “but that’s not what I was thinking.
I was trying to imagine you back then, because you seem nothing
like that person now.”
What could I say that wouldn’t sound bogus, even if it was true?
Unsure, I opted for Dad’s approach and said nothing.
“What’s your dad like?”
I gave her a quick recap. As I spoke, she scooped sand and let it
trail through her fi ngers, as if concentrating on my choice of words.
In the end, surprising myself again, I admitted that we were almost
strangers.
“You are,” she said, using that nonjudgmental, matter-of-fact
tone. “You’ve been gone for a couple of years, and even you admit
that you’ve changed. How could he know you?”
I sat up. The beach was packed; it was the time of day when
everyone who planned to come was already here, and no one was
quite ready to leave. Randy and Brad were playing Frisbee by the
water’s edge, running and shouting. A few others wandered over
to join them.
“I know,” I said. “But it’s not just that. We’ve always been
strangers. I mean, it’s just so hard to talk to him.”
As soon as I said it, I realized she was the fi rst person I’d ever
admitted it to. Strange. But then, most of what I was saying to her
sounded strange.
“Most people our age say that about their parents.”
Maybe, I thought. But this was different. It wasn’t a generational
difference, it was the fact that for my dad, normal chitchat was all
56 Nicholas Sparks
DEAR JOHN 57
but impossible, unless it dealt with coins. I said nothing more, however,
and Savannah smoothed the sand in front of her. When she
spoke, her voice was soft. “I’d like to meet him.”
I turned toward her. “Yeah?”
“He sounds interesting. I’ve always loved people who have
this . . . passion for life.”
“It’s a passion for coins, not life,” I corrected her.
“It’s the same thing. Passion is passion. It’s the excitement between
the tedious spaces, and it doesn’t matter where it’s directed.”
She shuffl ed her feet in the sand. “Well, most of the time, anyway.
I’m not talking vices here.”
“Like you and caffeine.”
She smiled, fl ashing the small gap between her two front teeth.
“Exactly. It can be coins or sports or politics or horses or music or
faith . . . the saddest people I’ve ever met in life are the ones who
don’t care deeply about anything at all. Passion and satisfaction go
hand in hand, and without them, any happiness is only temporary,
because there’s nothing to make it last. I’d love to hear your dad talk
about coins, because that’s when you see a person at his best, and
I’ve found that someone else’s happiness is usually infectious.”
I was struck by her words. Despite Tim’s opinion that she was
naive, she seemed far more mature than most people our age.
Then again, considering the way she looked in her bikini, she
probably could have recited the phone book and I would have
been impressed.
Savannah sat up beside me, and her gaze followed mine. The
game of Frisbee was in full swing; as Brad zipped the disk, a couple
of others went running for it. They both dove for it simultaneously,
splashing in the shallows as their heads collided. The one in red
shorts came up empty, swearing and holding his head, his shorts
covered in sand. The others laughed, and I found myself smiling
and wincing simultaneously.
“Did you see that?” I asked.
“Hold on,” she said instead. “I’ll be right back.” She trotted over
to red shorts. He saw her approaching and froze, as did the guy next
to him. Savannah, I realized, had pretty much the same effect on
every guy, not just me. I could see her talking and smiling, turning
that earnest gaze on the guy, who nodded as she spoke, looking like
a chastised adolescent. She returned to my side and sat again. I
didn’t ask, knowing it wasn’t my business, but I knew I was telegraphing
my curiosity.
“Normally, I wouldn’t have said anything, but I asked him to
keep his language in check because of all the families out here,” she
explained. “There are lots of little kids around. He said he would.”
I should have guessed. “Did you suggest he use ‘Holy cow’ or
‘Geez’ instead?”
She squinted at me mischievously. “You liked those expressions,
didn’t you.”
“I’m thinking of passing them on to my squad. They’ll add to our
intimidation factor when we’re busting down doors and launching
RPGs.”
She giggled. “Defi nitely scarier than swearing, even if I don’t
know what an RPG is.”
“Rocket-propelled grenade.” Despite myself, I liked her more
with every passing minute. “What are you doing tonight?”
“I don’t have any plans. Well, except for the meeting. Why?
Did you want to bring me to meet your father?”
“No. Well, not tonight, anyway. Later. Tonight, I wanted to show
you around Wilmington.”
“Are you asking me out?”
“Yeah,” I admitted. “I’ll have you back whenever you want. I
know you’ve got to work tomorrow, but there’s this great place
that I want to show you.”
“What kind of place?”
“A local place. Specializes in seafood. But it’s more of an experience.”
She wrapped her arms around her knees. “I usually don’t date
58 Nicholas Sparks
DEAR JOHN 59
strangers,” she fi nally said, “and we only met yesterday. You think
I can trust you?”
“I wouldn’t,” I said.
She laughed. “Well, in that case, I suppose I can make an
exception.”
“Yeah?”
“Yeah,” she said. “I’m a sucker for honest guys with crew cuts.
What time?”
I was home by fi ve, and though I didn’t feel sunburned—
that Southern European skin again—the burn was obvious when
I showered. The water stung as it ricocheted off my chest and
shoulders, and my face made me feel as if I were running a low
fever. Afterward, I shaved for the fi rst time since I’d been home
and dressed in a clean pair of shorts and one of the few relatively
nice button-down shirts I owned, light blue. Lucy had bought it
for me and swore the color was perfect for me. I rolled up the
sleeves and left the shirt untucked, then rummaged through my
closet for an ancient pair of sandals.
Through the crack in the door, I could see my dad at his desk,
and it struck me that for the second night in a row I’d made other
plans for dinner. Nor had I spent any time with him this weekend.
He wouldn’t complain, I knew, but I still felt a pang of guilt. After
we stopped talking about coins, breakfast and dinner were the only
things we shared, and I was now depriving him even of that. Maybe
I hadn’t changed as much as I thought I had. I was staying in his
home and eating his food, and I was just about to ask him whether
I could borrow his car. In other words, pretty much leading my own
life and using him in the process. I wondered what Savannah
would say to that, but I think I already knew the answer. Savannah
Four
....Z....
DEAR JOHN 61
sometimes sounded a lot like the little voice that had taken up
residence in my head but never bothered paying rent, and right
now it whispered that if I felt guilty, maybe I was doing something
wrong. I resolved that I would spend more time with him. It was a
cop-out and I admitted it, but I didn’t know what else to do.
When I opened the door, Dad looked startled to see me.
“Hey, Dad,” I said, taking my usual seat.
“Hi, John.” As soon as he spoke, he glanced at his desk and ran
a hand over his thinning hair. When I added nothing, he realized
that he should ask me a question. “How was your day?” he fi nally
inquired.
I shifted in my seat. “It was great, actually. I spent most of the
day with Savannah, the girl I told you about last night.”
“Oh.” His eyes drifted to the side, refusing to meet mine. “You
didn’t tell me about her.”
“I didn’t?”
“No, but that’s okay. It was late.” For the fi rst time, he seemed
to realize I was dressed up, or at least as dressed up as he’d ever
seen me, but he couldn’t bring himself to ask about it.
I tugged at my shirt, letting him off the hook. “Yeah, I know,
trying to impress her, right? I’m taking her out to dinner tonight,”
I said. “Is it okay if I borrow the car?”
“Oh . . . okay,” he said.
“I mean, did you need it tonight? I might be able to call a friend
or something.”
“No,” he said. He reached into his pocket for the keys. Nine
dads out of ten would have tossed them; mine held them out.
“You okay?” I asked.
“Just tired,” he said.
I stood and took the keys. “Dad?”
He glanced up again.
“I’m sorry about not having dinner with you these last couple
of nights.”
“It’s okay,” he said. “I understand.”
62 Nicholas Sparks
* * *
The sun was beginning its slow descent, and as I pulled out, the
sky was a swirl of fruity colors that contrasted dramatically with
the evening skies I’d come to know in Germany. Traffi c was horrendous,
as it usually was on Sunday nights, and it took almost
thirty exhaust-fumed minutes to get back to the beach and pull
in the drive.
I pushed open the door to the house without knocking. Two
guys seated on the couch watching baseball heard me come in.
“Hey,” they said, sounding uninterested and unsurprised.
“Have you seen Savannah?”
“Who?” one of them asked, obviously paying me little attention.
“Never mind. I’ll fi nd her.” I crossed the living room to the
back deck, saw the same guy as the night before grilling again and
a few others, but no sign of Savannah. Nor could I see her on the
beach. I was just about to go back in when I felt someone tapping
my shoulder.
“Who are you looking for?” she asked.
I turned around. “Some girl,” I said. “She tends to lose things at
piers, but she’s a quick learner when it comes to surfi ng.”
She put her hands on her hips, and I smiled. She was dressed in
shorts and a summer halter, with a hint of color in her cheeks, and
I noticed she’d applied a bit of mascara and lipstick. While I loved
her natural beauty—I am a kid from the beach—she was even
more striking than I remembered. I caught the whiff of some
lemony fragrance as she leaned toward me.
“That’s all I am? Some girl?” she asked. She sounded both playful
and serious, and for an instant, I fantasized about wrapping my
arms around her right then and there.
“Oh,” I said, feigning surprise. “It’s you.”
The two guys on the couch glanced toward us, then returend
to the screen.
“You ready to go?” I asked.
DEAR JOHN 63
“I’ve just got to get my purse,” she said. She retrieved it from
the kitchen counter, and we started for the door. “And where are
we going, by the way?”
When I told her, she lifted an eyebrow.
“You’re taking me to eat at a place with the word shack in the
name?”
“I’m just an underpaid grunt in the army. It’s all I can afford.”
She bumped against me as we walked. “See, this is why I usually
don’t date strangers.”
The Shrimp Shack is in downtown Wilmington, in the historic
area that borders the Cape Fear River. At one end of the historic
area are your typical tourist destinations: souvenir stores, a couple
of places specializing in antiques, a few upscale restaurants, coffee
shops, and various real estate offi ces. At the other end, however,
Wilmington displayed its character as a working port city: large
warehouses, more than one of which stood abandoned, and a few
other dated offi ce buildings only half-occupied. I doubted that the
tourists who fl ocked here in the summer ever ventured toward this
other end. This was the direction I turned. Little by little, the
crowds faded away until no one was left on the sidewalk as the area
grew more dilapidated.
“Where is this place?” Savannah asked.
“Just a little farther,” I said. “Up there, at the end.”
“It’s kind of out of the way, isn’t it?”
“It’s kind of a local institution,” I said. “The owner doesn’t care
if tourists come or not. He never has.”
A minute later, I slowed the car and turned into a small parking
lot bordering one of the warehouses. A few dozen cars were parked
in front of the Shrimp Shack, as they always were, and the place
hadn’t changed. As long as I’d known it, it had looked run-down,
with a broad, cluttered porch, peeling paint, and a crooked roofl ine
that made it appear as if the place were about to fall over, despite
the fact that it had been weathering hurricanes since the 1940s.
64 Nicholas Sparks
The exterior was decorated with nets, hubcaps, license plates, an
old anchor, oars, and a few rusty chains. A broken rowboat sat near
the door.
The sky was beginning its lazy fade to black as we walked to the
entrance. I wondered whether I should reach for Savannah’s hand,
but in the end I did nothing. While I may have had some version of
hormone-induced success with women, I had very little experience
when it came to girls I cared about. Despite the fact that only a day
had passed since we’d met, I already knew I was in new territory.
We stepped onto the sagging porch, and Savannah pointed to
the rowboat. “Maybe that’s why he opened a restaurant. Because
his boat sank.”
“Could be. Or maybe someone just left it there and he never
bothered to remove it. You ready?”
“As I’ll ever be,” she said, and I pushed open the door.
I don’t know what she expected, but she wore a satisfi ed expression
as she stepped inside. There was a long bar off on one side,
windows that overlooked the river, and, in the main seating area,
wooden picnic benches. A couple of waitresses with big hair—
they hadn’t seemed to change any more than the decor—were
moving among the tables, carrying platters of food. The air held
the greasy smell of fried food and cigarette smoke, but somehow
it seemed just right. Most of the tables were fi lled, but I motioned
toward one near the jukebox. It was playing a country-western
song, though I couldn’t have told you who the singer was. I’m
more of a classic-rock fan.
We wove our way among the tables. Most of the customers
looked as if they worked hard for a living: construction workers,
landscapers, truckers, and the like. I hadn’t seen so many NASCAR
baseball hats since . . . well, I’d never seen that many. A few guys
in my squad were fans, but I never got the appeal of watching a
bunch of guys drive in circles all day or fi gured out why they didn’t
post the articles in the automotive section of the paper instead of
DEAR JOHN 65
the sports section. We sat across from each other, and I watched
Savannah take in the room.
“I like places like this,” she said. “Was this your regular hangout
when you lived here?”
“No, this was more of a special-occasion place. Usually I hung
out at a place called Leroy’s. It’s a bar near Wrightsville Beach.”
She reached for a laminated menu sandwiched between a metal
napkin holder and bottles of ketchup and Texas Pete hot sauce.
“This is way better,” she said. She opened the menu. “Now,
what’s this place famous for?”
“Shrimp,” I said.
“Gee, really?” she asked.
“Seriously. Every kind of shrimp you can imagine. You know
that scene in Forrest Gump when Bubba was telling Forrest all the
ways to prepare shrimp? Grilled, sautéed, barbecued, Cajun
shrimp, lemon shrimp, shrimp Creole, shrimp cocktail . . . That’s
this place.”
“What do you like?”
“I like ’em chilled with cocktail sauce on the side. Or fried.”
She closed the menu. “You pick,” she said, sliding her menu
toward me. “I trust you.”
I slipped the menu back into its place against the napkin
holder.
“So?”
“Chilled. In a bucket. It’s the consummate experience.”
She leaned across the table. “So how many women have you
brought here? For the consummate experience, I mean.”
“Including you? Let me think.” I drummed my fi ngers on the
table. “One.”
“I’m honored.”
“This was more of a place for me and my friends when we wanted
to eat instead of drink. There was no better food after a day spent
surfi ng.”
66 Nicholas Sparks
“As I’ll soon fi nd out.”
The waitress showed up and I ordered the shrimp. When she
asked what we wanted to drink, I lifted my hands.
“Sweet tea, please,” Savannah said.
“Make it two,” I added.
After the waitress left, we settled into easy conversation, uninterrupted
even when our drinks arrived. We talked about life in the
army again; for whatever reason, Savannah seemed fascinated by it.
She also asked about growing up here. I told her more than I
thought I would about my high school years and probably too much
about the three years before enlistment.
She listened intently, asking questions now and then, and I realized
it had been a long time since I’d been on a date like this; a few
years, maybe more. Not since Lucy, anyway. I hadn’t seen any reason
for it, but as I sat across from Savannah, I had to rethink my
decision. I liked being alone with her, and I wanted to see more of
her. Not just tonight, but tomorrow and the next day. Everything—
from the easy way she laughed to her wit to her obvious concern for
others—struck me as fresh and desirable. Then again, spending
time with her also made me realize how lonely I’d been. I hadn’t
admitted that to myself, but after just two days with Savannah, I
knew it was true.
“Let’s get some more music going,” she said, interrupting my
thoughts.
I rose from my seat, rummaged through my pockets for a couple
of quarters, and dropped them in. Savannah put both hands on the
glass and leaned forward as she read the titles, then picked a few
songs. By the time we got back to the table, the fi rst was already
going.
“You know, I just realized that I’ve done all the talking tonight,”
I said.
“You are a chatty thing,” she observed.
I freed my utensils from the rolled-up paper napkin. “How about
DEAR JOHN 67
you? You know all about me, but I don’t know anything about
you.”
“Sure you do,” she said. “You know how old I am, where I go to
school, my major, and the fact that I don’t drink. You know I’m from
Lenoir, live on a ranch, love horses, and spend my summers building
homes for Habitat for Humanity. You know a lot.”
Yeah, I suddenly realized, I did. Including things she hadn’t
mentioned. “It’s not enough,” I said. “Your turn.”
She leaned forward. “Ask what you will.”
“Tell me about your parents,” I said.
“All right,” she said, reaching for a napkin. She wiped the condensation
from her glass. “My mom and dad have been married for
twenty-fi ve years, and they’re still happy as clams and madly in love.
They met in college at Appalachian State, and Mom worked at a
bank for a couple of years until she had me. Since then, she’s been
a stay-at-home mom, and she was the kind of mom who was there
for everyone else, too. Classroom helper, volunteer driver, coach of
our soccer team, head of the PTA, all that kind of stuff. Now that
I’m gone, she spends every day volunteering for other things—the
library, schools, the church, whatever. Dad is a history teacher at
the school, and he’s coached the girls volleyball team since I was
little. Last year they made it to the state fi nals, but they lost. He’s
also a deacon in our church, and he runs the youth group and the
choir. Do you want to see a picture?”
“Sure,” I said.
She opened her purse and removed her wallet. She fl ipped it
open and pushed it across the table, our fi ngers brushing.
“They’re a little ragged at the edges from being in the ocean,”
she said, “but you get the idea.”
I turned the photo around. Savannah took more after her father
than her mother, or had at least inherited the darker features from
him.
“Nice-looking couple.”
68 Nicholas Sparks
“I love ’em,” she said, taking the wallet back. “They’re the
best.”
“Why do you live on a ranch if your dad is a teacher?”
“Oh, it’s not a working ranch. It used to be when my grandfather
owned it, but he had to sell bits and pieces to pay the taxes on it.
By the time my dad inherited it, it was down to ten acres with a
house, stables, and a corral. It’s more like a great big yard than a
ranch. It’s the way we always refer to it, but I guess that conjures up
the wrong image, huh?”
“I know you said you did gymnastics, but did you play volleyball
for your dad?”
“No,” she said. “I mean, he’s a great coach, but he always encouraged
me to do what was right for me. And volleyball wasn’t
it. I tried and I was okay, but it wasn’t what I loved.”
“You loved horses.”
“Since I was a little girl. My mom gave me this statue of a horse
when I was really little, and that’s what started the whole thing. I
got my fi rst horse for Christmas when I was eight, and it’s still the
best Christmas gift I’ve ever received. Slocum. She was this really
gentle old mare, and she was perfect for me. The deal was that I
had to take care of her—feed her and brush her and keep her stall
clean. Between her, school, gymnastics, and taking care of the rest
of the animals, that was pretty much all I had time for.”
“The rest of the animals?”
“When I was growing up, our house was kind of like a farm. Dogs,
cats, even a llama for a while. I was a sucker when it came to strays.
My parents got to the point where they wouldn’t even argue with
me about it. There were usually four or fi ve at any one time. Sometimes
an owner would come, hoping to fi nd a lost pet, and he’d
leave with one of our recent additions if he couldn’t fi nd it. We were
like the pound.”
“Your parents were patient.”
“Yes,” she said, “they were. But they were suckers for strays, too.
Even though she’d deny it, my mom was worse than me.”
DEAR JOHN 69
I studied her. “I’ll bet you were a good student.”
“Straight A’s. I was valedictorian of my class.”
“Why doesn’t that surprise me?”
“I don’t know,” she said. “Why?”
I didn’t answer. “Did you ever have a serious boyfriend?”
“Oh, now we’re getting down to the nitty-gritty, huh?”
“I was just asking.”
“What do you think?”
“I think,” I said, dragging out the words, “I have no idea.”
She laughed. “Then . . . let’s let that question go for now. A little
mystery is good for the soul. Besides, I’d be willing to bet you can
fi gure it out on your own.”
The waitress arrived with the bucket of shrimp and a couple of
plastic containers of cocktail sauce, set them on the table, and refi
lled our tea with the effi ciency of someone who’d been doing it for
way too long. She turned on her heels without asking whether we
needed anything else.
“This place is legendary for its hospitality.”
“She’s just busy,” Savannah said, reaching for a shrimp. “And
besides, I think she knows you’re grilling me and wanted to leave
me to my inquisitor.”
She cracked the shrimp and peeled it, then dipped it in the
sauce before taking a bite. I reached in the pail and set a couple
on my plate.
“What else do you want to know?”
“I don’t know. Anything. What’s the best thing about being in
college?”
She thought about it as she fi lled her plate. “Good teachers,” she
fi nally said. “In college, you can sometimes pick your professors, as
long as you’re fl exible with your schedule. That’s what I like. Before
I started, that was the advice my dad gave me. He said to pick classes
based on the teacher whenever you can, not the subject. I mean, he
knew that you had to take certain subjects to get a degree, but his
point was that good teachers are priceless. They inspire you, they
70 Nicholas Sparks
entertain you, and you end up learning a ton even when you don’t
know it.”
“Because they’re passionate about their subjects,” I said.
She winked. “Exactly. And he was right. I’ve taken classes in
subjects I never thought I’d be interested in and as far away from
my major as you can imagine. But you know what? I still remember
those classes as if I were still taking them.”
“I’m impressed. I thought you’d say something like going to the
basketball games was the best part about being in college. It’s like
a religion at Chapel Hill.”
“I enjoy those, too. Just like I enjoy the friends I’m making and
living away from Mom and Dad and all that. I’ve learned a lot
since I left Lenoir. I mean, I had a wonderful life there, and my
parents are great, but I was . . . sheltered. I’ve had a few eye-opening
experiences.”
“Like what?”
“Lots of things. Like feeling the pressure to drink or hook up with
a guy every time I went out. My fi rst year, I hated UNC. I didn’t feel
like I fi t in, and I didn’t. I begged my parents to let me come home
or transfer, but they wouldn’t agree. I think they knew that in the
long run I’d regret it, and they were probably right. It wasn’t until
some time during my sophomore year that I met some girls who felt
the same way I did about those types of things, and it’s been a lot
better ever since. I joined a couple of Christian student groups, I
spend Saturday mornings at a shelter in Raleigh serving the poor,
and I feel no pressure at all to go to this or that party or date this or
that guy. And if I do go to a party, the pressure doesn’t get to me. I
just accept the fact that I don’t have to do what everyone else does.
I can do what’s right for me.”
Which explained why she was with me last night, I thought. And
right now, for that matter.
She brightened. “It’s kind of like you, I guess. In the past couple
of years, I’ve grown up. So in addition to both of us being expert
surfers, we have that in common, too.”
DEAR JOHN 71
I laughed. “Yeah. Except that I struggled a lot more than you
did.”
She leaned forward again. “My dad always said that when you’re
struggling with something, look at all the people around you and
realize that every single person you see is struggling with something,
and to them, it’s just as hard as what you’re going through.”
“Your dad sounds like a smart man.”
“Mom and Dad both. I think they both graduated in the top fi ve
in college. That’s how they met. Studying in the library. Education
was really important to both of them, and they sort of made me
their project. I mean, I was reading before I got to kindergarten, but
they never made it seem like a chore. And they’ve talked to me like
I was an adult for as long as I can remember.”
For a moment, I wondered how different my life would have been
had they been my parents, but I shook the thought away. I knew my
father had done the best he could, and I had no regrets about the
way I’d turned out. Regrets about the journey, maybe, but not the
destination. Because however it had happened, I’d somehow ended
up eating shrimp in a dingy downtown shack with a girl that I already
knew I’d never forget.
After dinner, we headed back to the house, which was surprisingly
quiet. The music was still playing, but most people were relaxing
around the fi re, as if anticipating an early morning. Tim sat among
them, engrossed in earnest conversation. Surprising me, Savannah
reached for my hand, halting me in my tracks before we
reached the group.
“Let’s go for a walk,” she said. “I want to let dinner settle just a
little before I sit down.”
Above us, a few wispy clouds were spread among the stars, and
the moon, still full, hovered just over the horizon. A light breeze
fanned my cheek, and I could hear the ceaseless motion of the
waves as they rolled up the shore. The tide had gone out, and we
moved to the harder, more compact sand near the water’s edge.
72 Nicholas Sparks
Savannah put a hand on my shoulder for balance as she removed
one sandal, then another. When she fi nished, I did the same, and
we walked in silence for a few steps.
“It’s so beautiful out here. I mean, I love the mountains, but this
is wonderful in its own way. It’s . . . peaceful.”
I felt the same words could be used to describe her, and I wasn’t
sure what to say.
“I can’t believe that I only met you yesterday,” she added. “It
seems like I’ve known you much longer.”
Her hand felt warm and comfortable in mine. “I was thinking
the same thing.”
She gave a dreamy smile, studying the stars. “I wonder what Tim
thinks about this,” she murmured. She glanced at me. “He thinks
I’m a little naive.”
“Are you?”
“Sometimes,” she admitted, and I laughed.
She went on. “I mean, when I see two people heading off on a
walk like this, I’m thinking, Oh, that’s sweet. I’m not thinking
they’re going to hook up behind the dunes. But the fact is, sometimes
they do. I just never realize it beforehand, and I’m always
surprised when I hear about it later. I can’t help it. Like last night,
after you left. I heard about two people here who did just that, and
I couldn’t believe it.”
“I would have been more surprised if it hadn’t happened.”
“That’s what I don’t like about college, by the way. It’s like a lot
of people don’t believe these years really count, so you’re allowed
to experiment with . . . whatever. There’s such a casual view about
things like sex and drinking and even drugs. I know that sounds
really old-fashioned, but I just don’t get it. Maybe that’s why I didn’t
want to go sit by the fi re like everyone else. To be honest, I’m kind
of disappointed in those two people I heard about, and I don’t want
to sit there trying to pretend that I’m not. I know I shouldn’t judge,
and I’m sure they’re good people since they’re here to help, but still,
DEAR JOHN 73
what was the point? Shouldn’t you save things like that for someone
you love? So that it really means something?”
I knew she didn’t want answers, nor did I offer any.
“Who told you about that couple?” I asked instead.
“Tim. I think he was disappointed, too, but what’s he going to
do? Kick them out?”
We had gone a good way down the beach, and we turned around.
In the distance, I could see the circle of fi gures silhouetted by the
fi re. The mist smelled of salt, and ghost crabs scattered to their holes
as we approached.
“I’m sorry,” she said. “I was out of line there.”
“About what?”
“For being so . . . upset about it. I shouldn’t pass judgment. It’s
not my place.”
“Everyone judges,” I said. “It’s human nature.”
“I know. But . . . I’m not perfect, either. In the end, it’s only God’s
judgment that matters, and I’ve learned enough to know that no
one can presume to know the will of God.”
I smiled.
“What?” she asked.
“The way you talk reminds me of our chaplain. He says the same
thing.”
We strolled down the beach, and as we neared the house, we
moved away from the water’s edge, into the softer sand. Our feet
slipped with every step, and I could feel Savannah tighten her grip
on my hand. I wondered whether she would let go when we got
close to the fi re, and I was disappointed when she did.
“Hey,” Tim called out, his voice friendly. “You’re back.”
Randy was there, too, and he wore his usual sulky expression.
Frankly, I was getting a bit tired of his resentment. Brad stood
behind Susan, who was leaning into his chest. Susan seemed undecided
about whether to pretend to be happy, so she could learn
the details from Savannah, or to be upset for Randy’s benefi t. The
74 Nicholas Sparks
others, obviously indifferent, went back to their conversations.
Tim stood and made his way toward us.
“How was dinner?”
“It was great,” Savannah said. “I got a taste of local culture. We
went to the Shrimp Shack.”
“Sounds like fun,” he commented.
I strained to detect any undercurrent of jealousy but found
none. Tim motioned over his shoulder and went on. “Do you two
want to join us? We’re just winding down, getting ready for tomorrow.”
“Actually, I’m a bit sleepy. I was just going to walk John to his
car, and after that I’ll turn in. What time do we need to be up?”
“Six. We’ll have breakfast and be at the site tomorrow by
seven-thirty. Don’t forget your sunscreen. We’ll be out in the sun
all day.”
“I’ll remember. You should remind everyone else.”
“I have,” he said. “And I’ll do it again tomorrow. But you just
wait—some folks won’t listen and they’ll get fried.”
“I’ll see you in the morning,” she said.
“All right.” He turned his attention to me. “I’m glad you came
by today.”
“Me too,” I said.
“And listen, if you fi nd yourself bored in the next couple of
weeks, we could always use an extra hand.”
I laughed. “I knew it was coming.”
“I am who I am,” he said, holding out his hand. “But either way,
I hope to see you again.”
We shook hands. Tim went back to his seat, and Savannah
nodded toward the house. We made our way toward the dune,
stopped to put our sandals back on, then followed the wooden
pathway, through the sea grass, and around the house. A minute
later, we were at the car. In the darkness, I couldn’t make out her
expression.
DEAR JOHN 75
“I had a good time tonight,” she said. “And today.”
I swallowed. “When can I see you again?”
It was a simple question, expected even, but I was surprised to
hear the desire in my tone. I hadn’t even kissed her yet.
“I suppose,” she said, “that depends on you. You know where
I am.”
“How about tomorrow night?” I blurted out. “I know of another
place that has a band, and it’s a lot of fun.”
She tucked a strand of hair behind her ear. “How about the
night after? Would that be okay? It’s just that the fi rst day at the
site is always . . . exciting and tiring at the same time. We have a
big group dinner, and I really shouldn’t miss it.”
“Yeah, that’s fi ne,” I said, thinking it wasn’t fi ne at all.
She must have heard something in my voice. “Like Tim said,
you’re welcome to come by if you’d like.”
“No, that’s okay. Tuesday night’s fi ne.”
We continued to stand there, one of those awkward moments
I’ll probably never get used to, but she turned away before I could
attempt a kiss. Normally, I would have plunged ahead just to see
what happened; I may not have been open about my feelings, but
I was impulsive and quick to action. With Savannah, I felt oddly
paralyzed. She didn’t appear to be in any hurry, either.
A car passed by, breaking the spell. She took a step toward the
house, then stopped and put her hand on my arm. In an innocent
gesture, she kissed me on the cheek. It was almost sisterly, but her
lips were soft and the scent of her engulfed me, lingering even
after she pulled back.
“I really did have a good time,” she murmured. “I don’t think
I’ll forget about today for a long, long time.”
I felt her hand leave my arm, and then in a whisper she vanished,
retreating up the stairs of the house.
At home later that night, I found myself tossing and turning in
bed, reliving the events of the day. Finally I sat up, wishing I had
76 Nicholas Sparks
told her how much our day had meant to me. Outside my window,
I saw a shooting star cross the sky in a brilliant streak of white. I
wanted to believe it was an omen, though of what, I wasn’t sure.
Instead, all I could do was replay Savannah’s gentle kiss on my
cheek for the hundredth time and wonder how I could be falling for
a girl that I’d met only the day before.
Mornin’, Dad,” I said, staggering into the kitchen. I
squinted in the bright morning light and saw my dad standing in
front of the stove. The smell of bacon fi lled the air.
“Oh . . . hi, John.”
I plopped myself on the chair, still trying to wake up. “Yeah, I
know I’m up early, but I wanted to catch you before you headed
off to work.”
“Oh,” he said. “Okay. Let me just get a bit more food going.”
He seemed almost excited, despite this wrinkle in the routine.
It was times like these that let me know he was glad I was home.
“Is there any coffee?” I asked.
“It’s in the pot,” he said.
I poured myself a cup and wandered to the table. The newspaper
lay as it had arrived. My dad always read it over breakfast, and I knew
enough not to touch it. He had always been funny about being the
fi rst to read it, and he always read it in exactly the same order.
I expected my dad to ask how the evening had gone with Savannah,
but instead he said nothing, preferring to concentrate on his
cooking. Noting the clock, I knew Savannah would be leaving for
the site in a few minutes, and I wondered whether she was thinking
about me as much as I was thinking about her. In the rush of what
Five
....Z....
was no doubt a chaotic morning for her, I doubted she was. The
realization made me ache unexpectedly.
“What did you do last night?” I fi nally asked, trying to get my
mind off Savannah. He kept on cooking as if he hadn’t heard me.
“Dad?” I said.
“Yeah?” he asked.
“How’d it go last night?”
“How’d what go?”
“Your night. Anything exciting happen?”
“No,” he said, “nothing.” He smiled at me before turning a
couple of slices in the pan. I could hear the sizzling intensify.
“I had a great time,” I volunteered. “Savannah’s really something.
We actually went to church together yesterday.”
Somehow I thought he’d ask more about it, and I’ll admit that I
wanted him to. I imagined that we might have a real conversation,
the kind that other fathers might have with their sons, that he
might laugh and maybe crack a joke or two. Instead, he turned on
another burner. He sprayed a small frying pan with oil and poured
in the egg batter.
“Would you mind putting some bread in the toaster?” he
asked.
I sighed. “No,” I said, already knowing that we’d eat in silence.
“No problem at all.”
I spent the rest of the day surfi ng, or rather, trying to surf. The
ocean had calmed overnight, and the small swells were nothing
to get excited about. Making matters worse, they broke nearer to
shore than they had the day before, so even if I did fi nd a few
worth riding, the experience didn’t last long before the waves
petered out. In the past, I might have gone to Oak Island or even
driven up to Atlantic Beach, where I could catch a ride out to
Shackleford Banks in the hope that I’d fi nd something better.
Today, I just wasn’t in the mood.
Instead, I surfed where I had the previous two days. The house
78 Nicholas Sparks
was a little way down the beach, and it looked almost uninhabited.
The back door was closed, the towels were gone, and no one passed
by the window or stepped out on the deck. I wondered when everyone
would be getting back. Probably around four or fi ve o’clock,
and I had already made the decision that I’d be long gone by then.
There was no reason to be here in the fi rst place, and the last thing
I wanted Savannah to think was that I was some kind of stalker.
I left around three and swung by Leroy’s. The bar was darker and
dingier than I remembered, and I hated the place as soon as I
walked in the door. I had always thought of it as a pro bar, as in
professional alcoholics bar, and I saw the proof as lonely men sat
hovering over glasses of Tennessee’s fi nest, hoping for refuge from
life’s problems. Leroy was there, and he recognized me when I
walked in. When I took a seat at the bar, he automatically brought
a glass to the beer tap and began fi lling it.
“Long time no see,” he commented. “You keeping out of
trouble?”
“Trying,” I grunted. I glanced around the bar as he slid the glass
in front of me. “I like what you’ve done with the place,” I said,
motioning over my shoulder.
“Good. It’s all for you. You gonna eat anything?”
“No. This is fi ne, thanks.”
He wiped the counter in front of me, then fl ipped the rag over
his shoulder and moved away to take someone else’s order. A moment
later, I felt a hand on my shoulder.
“Johnny! What’re you doing here?”
I turned and saw one of the many friends I had come to despise.
That’s the way it was here. I hated everything about the place, including
my friends, and I realized that I always had. I had no idea
why I’d come, or even why I’d ever made this a regular hangout,
other than the fact that it was here and I had no place else to go.
“Hey, Toby,” I said.
Tall and scrawny, Toby took a seat beside me, and when he
turned to face me, I saw that his eyes were already glassy. He
DEAR JOHN 79
smelled as if he hadn’t showered in days, and his shirt was stained.
“You still playing Rambo?” he asked, his words slurred. “You look
like you’ve been working out.”
“Yeah,” I said, not wanting to go into it. “What are you doing
these days?”
“Hanging out, mainly. For the last couple of weeks, anyway. I was
working at Quick Stop until a couple of weeks ago, but the owner
was a real ass.”
“Still living at home?”
“Of course,” he said, sounding almost proud of the fact. He
tipped the bottle and took a long drink, then focused on my arms.
“You look good. You been working out?” he asked again.
“A little,” I said, knowing he didn’t remember he’d already
asked.
“You’re big.”
I couldn’t think of anything to say. Toby took another drink.
“Hey, there’s a party tonight at Mandy’s,” he said. “You remember
Mandy, right?”
Yeah, I remembered. A girl from my past who lasted less than
a weekend. Toby was still going on.
“Her parents are up in New York or someplace like that, and it
should be a real banger. We’re just having a little pre-party to get us
in the proper mood. You want to join us?”
He motioned over his shoulder toward four guys at a corner
table littered with three empty pitchers. I recognized two from my
past life, but the others were strangers.
“I can’t,” I said, “I’m supposed to be meeting my dad for dinner.
Thanks, though.”
“Blow him off. It’s going to be a blast. Kim’ll be there.”
Another woman from my past, another reminder that made me
wince inside. I could barely stomach the person I used to be.
“I can’t,” I said, shaking my head. I stood, leaving the mostly
full glass in front of me. “I promised. And he’s letting me stay with
him. You know how it is.”
80 Nicholas Sparks
That made sense to him, and he nodded. “Then let’s get together
this weekend. A bunch of us are heading up to Ocracoke
to go surfi ng.”
“Maybe,” I said, knowing there wasn’t a chance.
“Your dad still have the same number?”
“Yeah,” I said.
I left, sure that he’d never call and that I’d never return to
Leroy’s.
On my way home, I picked up steaks for dinner, along with a bag
of salad, some dressing, and a couple of potatoes. Without a car, it
wasn’t easy carrying the bag along with my surfboard all the way
back home, but I didn’t really mind the walk. I’d done it for years,
and my shoes were a whole lot more comfortable than the boots
I’d grown used to.
Once home, I dragged the grill from the garage, along with a bag
of briquettes and lighter fl uid. The grill was dusty, as if it hadn’t
been used for years. I set it up on the back porch and emptied out
the charcoal dust before hosing off the cobwebs and letting it dry
in the sun. Inside, I added some salt, pepper, and garlic powder to
the steaks, wrapped the potatoes in foil and put them in the oven,
then poured the salad in a bowl. Once the grill was dry, I got the
briquettes going and set the table out back.
Dad walked in just as I was adding the steaks to the grill.
“Hey, Dad,” I said over my shoulder. “I thought I’d make us
dinner tonight.”
“Oh,” he said. It seemed to take him an instant to grasp the fact
that he wouldn’t be cooking for me. “Okay,” he fi nally added.
“How do you like your steak?”
“Medium,” he said. He continued to stand near the sliding glass
door.
“It looks like you haven’t used the grill since I left,” I said. “But
you should. There’s nothing better than a grilled steak. My mouth
was watering all the way home.”
DEAR JOHN 81
“I’m going to go change my clothes.”
“Steaks will be done in about ten minutes.”
When he left I went back into the kitchen, took out the potatoes
and the bowl of salad—along with dressing, butter, and steak
sauce—and put them on the table. I heard the patio door slide
open, and my dad emerged carrying two glasses of milk, looking
like a cruise ship tourist. He was dressed in shorts, black socks,
tennis shoes, and a fl owered Hawaiian shirt. His legs were painfully
white, as if he hadn’t worn shorts in years. If ever. Thinking
back, I’m not sure I’d ever seen him in shorts. I did my best to
pretend he looked normal.
“Just in time,” I said, returning to the grill. I loaded both plates
with steaks and set one in front of him.
“Thanks,” he said.
“My pleasure.”
He added salad to his plate and poured the dressing, then unwrapped
his potato. He added butter, then poured steak sauce onto
the plate, making a small puddle. Normal and expected, except for
the fact that he did all this in silence.
“How was your day?” I asked, as always.
“The same,” he answered. As always. He smiled again but added
nothing else.
My dad, the social misfi t. I wondered again why he found conversation
so diffi cult and tried to imagine what he’d been like in
his youth. How had he ever found someone to marry? I knew the
last question sounded petty, but it hadn’t come from spite. I was
genuinely curious. We ate for a while, the clatter of forks the only
sound to keep us company.
“Savannah said she’d like to meet you,” I fi nally said, trying
again.
He cut at his steak. “Your lady friend?”
Only my dad would phrase it that way. “Yeah,” I said. “I think
you’ll like her.”
He nodded.
82 Nicholas Sparks
“She’s a student at UNC,” I explained.
He knew it was his turn, and I could sense his relief when another
question came to him. “How did you meet her?”
I told him about the bag, painting the picture, trying to make the
story as humorous as possible, but laughter eluded him.
“That was kind of you,” he observed.
Another conversation stopper. I cut another piece of steak.
“Dad? Do you mind if I ask you a question?”
“Of course not.”
“How did you and Mom meet?”
It was the fi rst time I’d asked about her in years. Because she’d
never been part of my life, because I had no memories, I’d seldom
felt the need to do so. Even now, I didn’t really care; I just wanted
him to talk to me. He took his time adding more butter to his
potato, and I knew he didn’t want to answer.
“We met at a diner,” he said fi nally. “She was a waitress.”
I waited. Nothing more seemed forthcoming.
“Was she pretty?”
“Yes,” he said.
“What was she like?”
He mashed the potato and added salt, sprinkling it with care.
“She was like you,” he concluded.
“What do you mean?”
“Umm . . .” He hesitated. “She could be . . . stubborn.”
I wasn’t sure what to think or even what he meant. Before I could
dwell on it, he rose from the table and seized his glass.
“Would you like some more milk?” he asked, and I knew he
would say no more about her.
DEAR JOHN 83
T
me is relative. I know I’m not the fi rst to realize it and far from the most famous, and my realization had nothing to do
with energy or mass or the speed of light or anything else Einstein
might have postulated. Rather, it had to do with the drag of hours
while I waited for Savannah.
After my dad and I fi nished dinner, I thought about her; I
thought of her again soon after I woke. I spent the day surfi ng, and
though the waves were better than they’d been the day before, I
couldn’t really concentrate and decided to call it quits by midafternoon.
I debated whether or not to grab a cheeseburger at a little
place by the beach—the best burgers in town, by the way—but
even though I was in the mood, I just went home, hoping that I
could talk Savannah into a burger later. I read a bit of the latest
Stephen King novel, showered and threw on a pair of jeans and a
polo, then read for another couple of hours before glancing at the
clock and realizing only twenty minutes had passed. That’s what I
meant by time being relative.
When my dad got home, he saw the way I was dressed and offered
his keys.
“Are you going to see Savannah?” he asked.
Six
....Z....
“Yeah,” I said, rising from the couch. I took the keys. “I might be
late getting in.”
He scratched the back of his head. “Okay,” he said.
“Breakfast tomorrow?”
“Okay.” For a reason I couldn’t understand, he sounded almost
scared.
“All right,” I said. “I’ll see you later, okay?”
“I’ll probably be sleeping.”
“I didn’t mean it literally.”
“Oh,” he said. “Okay.”
I headed for the door. Just as I opened it, I heard him sigh.
“I’d like to meet Savannah, too,” he said in a voice so soft, I
barely heard it.
The sky was still bright and the sun was bending light across the
water when I arrived at the house. As I got out, I realized I was
nervous. I couldn’t remember the last time any girl had made me
nervous, but I couldn’t shake the thought that somehow things
might have changed between us. I didn’t know how or why I felt
that way; all I knew was that I wasn’t sure what I’d do if my fears
proved correct.
I didn’t bother knocking and simply wandered in. The living
room was empty, but I could hear voices down the hall, and there
was the usual collection of people on the back deck. I stepped out,
asking for Savannah, and was told she was at the beach.
I trotted down to the sand and froze when I saw her seated near
the dune, next to Randy, Brad, and Susan. She hadn’t noticed me,
and I heard her laugh at something Randy said. She and Randy
looked as much a couple as Susan and Brad. I knew they weren’t,
that they were probably just talking about the house they were
building or sharing experiences from the last couple of days, but I
didn’t like it. Nor did I like the fact that Savannah was sitting as
close to Randy as she’d been to me. As I stood there, I wondered
DEAR JOHN 85
whether she even remembered our date, but she smiled when she
saw me as if nothing were amiss.
“There you are,” she said. “I was wondering when you’d show
up.”
Randy grinned. Despite her comment, he wore an almost victorious
expression.When the cat’s away, the mice are at play, he seemed
to be saying.
Savannah stood and ambled toward me. She was wearing a white
sleeveless blouse and a light, fl owing skirt that swayed when she
walked. I could see the additional color on her shoulders that spoke
of hours in the sun. When she got close, she stood on her tiptoes
and planted a kiss on my cheek.
“Hi,” she said, circling an arm around my waist.
“Hi.”
She leaned back slightly, as if evaluating my expression. “You
look like you missed me,” she said, her voice teasing.
As usual, I couldn’t think of a response, and she winked at my
inability to admit that I had. “Maybe I missed you, too,” she
added.
I touched her bare shoulder. “You ready to go?”
“As I’ll ever be,” she said.
We started toward the car and I reached for her hand, her touch
making me feel all was right with the world. Well, almost. . . .
I straightened. “I saw you talking to Randy,” I said, trying to
keep my voice neutral.
She squeezed my hand. “You did, huh?”
I tried again. “I take it you two got to know each other while
you were working.”
“We sure did. I was right, too. He’s a nice young man. After he
fi nishes here, he’s heading up to New York for a six-week internship
at Morgan Stanley.”
“Hmm,” I grunted.
She laughed under her breath. “Don’t tell me you’re jealous.”
“I’m not.”
86 Nicholas Sparks
“Good,” she concluded, squeezing my hand again. “Because
there’s no reason to be.”
I hung on those last few words. She needn’t have said them, but
I couldn’t be happier that she had. When we reached the car, I
opened her door.
“I was thinking of taking you out to Oysters,” I said. “It’s a
nightclub a little way down the beach. They’ll have a band later,
and we could go dancing.”
“What are we doing until then?”
“Are you hungry?” I asked, thinking about the cheeseburger I’d
passed on earlier. “A little,” she said. “I had a snack when I got
back, so I’m not too hungry yet.”
“How about a walk on the beach?”
“Hmm . . . maybe later.”
It was obvious that she already had something in mind. “Why
don’t you tell me what you want to do?”
She brightened. “How about if we go say hi to your father.”
I wasn’t sure I’d heard her right. “Really?”
“Yeah, really,” she said. “Just for a little while. Then we can get
something to eat and go out dancing.”
When I hesitated, she put a hand on my shoulder. “Please?”
I wasn’t all that happy about going, but the way she asked made it
impossible for me to say no. I was getting used to that, I suppose,
but I would rather have had her all to myself for the rest of the
evening. Nor did I understand why she wanted to see my dad tonight,
unless it meant she wasn’t quite as thrilled as I was at the
prospect of being alone. To be honest, the thought depressed me.
Still, she was in a good mood as she talked about the work they’d
accomplished over the last couple days. Tomorrow, they planned to
start on the windows. Randy, it turned out, had worked alongside
her on both days, which explained their “newfound friendship.”
That’s how she described it. I doubted Randy would have described
his interest in the same way.
DEAR JOHN 87
We pulled into the drive a few minutes later, and I noted the
light in my father’s den. When I turned off the engine, I fi ddled with
the keys before getting out.
“I told you my father is quiet, didn’t I?”
“Yeah,” she said. “It doesn’t matter, though. I just want to meet
him.”
“Why?” I asked. I know how it sounded, but I couldn’t help it.
“Because,” she said, “he’s your only family. And he was the one
who raised you.”
Once my dad got over the shock of my return with Savannah in
tow and the introductions were made, he ran a quick hand over his
wispy hair and stared at the fl oor.
“I’m sorry we didn’t call fi rst, but don’t blame John,” she said.
“It was all my fault.”
“Oh,” he said. “It’s okay.”
“Did we catch you at a bad time?”
“No.” He glanced up, then back to the fl oor again. “It’s a pleasure
to meet you,” he said.
For a moment, we all stood in the living room, none of us saying
anything. Savannah wore an easy smile, but I wondered if my dad
even realized it.
“Would you like something to drink?” he asked, as if suddenly
remembering he was supposed to play host.
“I’m fi ne, thanks,” she said. “John tells me that you’re quite the
coin collector.”
He turned to me, as if wondering whether he should answer. “I
try,” he fi nally said.
“Is that what we so rudely interrupted?” she asked, using the same
teasing tone she used with me. To my surprise, I heard my dad give
a nervous laugh. Not loud, but a laugh nonetheless. Amazing.
“No, you didn’t interrupt. I was just examining a new coin I got
today.”
As he spoke, I could sense him trying to gauge how I’d react.
88 Nicholas Sparks
Savannah either didn’t notice or pretended not to. “Really?” she
asked. “What kind?”
My dad shifted his weight from one foot to the other. Then,
to my astonishment, he looked up and asked her, “Would you like
to see it?”
We spent forty minutes in the den.
For the most part, I sat in the den and listened to my dad tell
stories I knew by heart. Like most serious collectors, he kept only
a few coins at home, and I didn’t have any idea where the rest of
them were stored. He would rotate part of the collection every
couple of weeks, new coins appearing as if by magic. Usually there
were never more than a dozen in his offi ce at any one time and
never anything valuable, but I got the impression that he could
have been showing Savannah a common Lincoln penny and she
would have been entranced. She asked dozens of questions, questions
either I or any book on coin collecting could have answered,
but as the minutes passed, her questions became more subtle. Instead
of asking why a coin might be particularly valuable, she
asked when and where he’d found it, and she was treated to tales
of boring weekends of my youth spent in places like Atlanta and
Charleston and Raleigh and Charlotte.
My dad talked a lot about those trips. Well, for him, anyway. He
still had a tendency to retreat into himself for long stretches, but
he probably said more in those forty minutes to her than he’d said
to me since I’d arrived home. From my vantage point, I saw the
passion she had referred to, but it was a passion I’d seen a thousand
times before, and it didn’t alter my opinion that he used coins as
a way to avoid life instead of embracing it. I’d stopped talking to
him about coins because I wanted to talk about something else;
my father stopped talking because he knew how I felt and could
discuss nothing else.
And yet . . .
My dad was happy, and I knew it. I could see the way his eyes
DEAR JOHN 89
gleamed as he gestured to a coin, pointing out the mint mark or
how crisp the stamp had been or how the value of a coin might
differ because it had arrows or wreaths. He showed Savannah proof
coins, coins minted at West Point, one of his favorite type to collect.
He pulled out a magnifying glass to show her fl aws, and when
Savannah held the magnifying glass, I could see the animation on
my father’s face. Despite my feelings about coins, I couldn’t help
smiling, simply to see my father so happy.
But he was still my dad, and there was no miracle. Once he’d
shown her the coins and told her everything about them and how
they’d been collected, his comments grew further and further apart.
He began to repeat himself and realized it, causing him to retreat
and grow even quieter. In time, Savannah must have sensed his
growing discomfort, for she gestured to the coins atop the desk.
“Thank you, Mr. Tyree. I feel like I’ve really learned something.”
My dad smiled, obviously drained, and I took it as my cue to
stand.
“Yeah, that was great. But we should probably be going,” I said.
“Oh . . . okay.”
“It was wonderful meeting you.”
When my dad nodded again, Savannah leaned in and gave him
a hug.
“Let’s do this again sometime,” she whispered, and though my
dad hugged her back, it reminded me of the lifeless hugs I’d received
as a child. I wondered if she felt as awkward as he obviously
did.
In the car, Savannah seemed lost in thought. I would have asked
about her impressions of my father but wasn’t sure I wanted to
hear the answer. I know my dad and I didn’t have the best relationship,
but she was right when she’d said he was the only family
I had and had raised me. I could complain about him, but the last
thing I wanted to hear was someone else doing it, too.
Still, I didn’t think she would say anything negative, simply
90 Nicholas Sparks
because it wasn’t in her nature, and when she turned to me, she
was smiling.
“Thanks for bringing me by to meet him,” she said. “He’s got such
a . . . warm heart.”
I’d never heard anyone describe him that way, but I liked it.
“I’m glad you liked him.”
“I did,” she said, sounding sincere. “He’s . . . gentle.” She glanced
at me. “But I think I understand why you got in so much trouble
when you were younger. He didn’t strike me as the kind of father
who would lay down the law.”
“He didn’t,” I agreed.
She shot me a playful scowl. “And mean old you took
advantage.”
I laughed. “Yeah, I suppose I did.”
She shook her head. “You should have known better.”
“I was just a kid.”
“Ah, the old youth excuse. You know that doesn’t hold water,
don’t you? I never took advantage of my parents.”
“Yes, the perfect child. I think you mentioned that.”
“Are you making fun of me?”
“No, of course not.”
She continued to stare at me. “I think you are,” she fi nally
decided.
“Okay, maybe a little.”
She thought about my answer. “Well, maybe I deserved that.
But just so you know, I wasn’t perfect.”
“No?”
“Of course not. I remember quite plainly, for instance, that in
fourth grade I got a B on a test.”
I feigned shock. “No! Don’t tell me that!”
“It’s true.”
“How did you ever recover?”
“How do you think?” She shrugged. “I told myself it would
never happen again.”
DEAR JOHN 91
92 Nicholas Sparks
I didn’t doubt it. “Are you hungry yet?”
“I thought you’d never ask.”
“What are you in the mood for?”
She drew up her hair in a sloppy ponytail, then let it go. “How
about a big, juicy cheeseburger?”
As soon as she said it, I found myself wondering if Savannah
was too good to be true.
I must admit that you bring me to eat at the most interesting
places,” Savannah said, glancing over her shoulder. In the
distance beyond the dune, we could see a long line of customers
snaking away from Joe’s Burger Stand in the middle of a gravel
parking lot.
“It’s the best in town,” I said, taking a bite of my enormous
burger.
Savannah sat close to me in the sand, facing the water. The
burgers were fantastic, nice and thick, and though the French fries
were a bit too greasy, they hit the spot. As she ate, Savannah
stared at the sea, and in the waning light I found myself thinking
that she seemed even more at home here than I did.
I thought again about the way she’d talked to my father. About
the way she talked to everyone, for that matter, including me. She
had the rare ability to be exactly what people needed when she was
with them and yet still remain true to herself. I couldn’t think of
anyone who remotely resembled her in appearance or personality,
and I wondered again why she’d taken a liking to me. We were as
different as two people could be. She was a mountain girl, gifted and
sweet, raised by attentive parents, with a desire to help those in need;
I was a tattooed army grunt, hard around the edges, and largely a
Seven
....Z....
94 Nicholas Sparks
stranger in my own home. Remembering how she’d been with my
dad, I could tell how gracefully her parents had raised her. And as she
sat beside me, I found myself wishing that I could be more like her.
“What are you thinking?”
Her voice, probing yet gentle, pulled me away from my thoughts.
“I was wondering why you’re here,” I confessed.
“Because I like the beach. I don’t get to do this very often. It’s
not like there are any waves or shrimp boats where I’m from.”
When she saw my expression, she tapped my hand. “That was
fl ippant,” she said, “I’m sorry. I’m here because I want to be here.”
I set aside the remains of my burger, wondering why I cared
so much. It was a new feeling for me, one I wasn’t sure I’d ever get
used to. She patted my arm and turned toward the water again.
“It’s gorgeous out here. All we need is a sunset over the water,
and it would be perfect.”
“We’d have to go to the other side of the country,” I said.
“Really? You’re trying to tell me the sun sets in the west?”
I noted the mischievous gleam in her eye.
“That’s what I hear, anyway.”
She’d eaten only half of her cheeseburger, and she slipped it into
the bag, then added the remains of mine as well. After folding the
bag over so the wind wouldn’t blow it away, she stretched out her
legs and turned to me, looking at once fl irtatious and innocent.
“You want to know what I was thinking?” she asked.
I waited, drinking in the sight of her.
“I was thinking that I wished you’d been with me the last couple
of days. I mean, I enjoyed getting to know everyone better. We ate
lunch together, and the dinner last night was a lot of fun, but it just
felt like something was wrong, like I was missing something. It wasn’t
until I saw you walking up the beach that I realized it was you.”
I swallowed. In another life, in another time, I would have
kissed her then, but even though I wanted to, I didn’t. Instead, all
I could do was stare at her. She met my gaze without a hint of selfconsciousness.
DEAR JOHN 95
“When you asked me why I was here, I made a joke because I
thought the answer was obvious. Spending time with you just feels
. . . right, somehow. Easy, like the way it’s supposed to be. Like it is
with my parents. They’re just comfortable together, and I remember
growing up thinking that one day I wanted to have that, too.” She
paused. “I’d like you to meet them one day.”
My throat had gone dry. “I’d like that, too.”
She slipped her hand easily into mine, her fi ngers intertwining
with my own.
We sat in peaceful silence. At the water’s edge, terns were bobbing
their beaks into the sand in search of food; a cluster of
seagulls broke as a wave rolled in. The sky had grown darker and
the clouds more ominous. Up the beach, I could see scattered
couples walking under a spreading indigo sky.
As we sat together, the air fi lled with the crashing of the surf. I
marveled at how new everything felt. New and yet comfortable, as
if we’d known each other forever. Yet we weren’t even a real couple.
Nor, a voice in my head reminded me, is it likely you ever will be. In
a little more than a week, I’d be heading back to Germany and this
would all be over. I’d spent enough time with my buddies to know
that it takes more than a few special days to survive a relationship
that spanned the Atlantic Ocean. I’d heard guys in my unit
swear they were in love after coming off leave—and maybe they
were—but it never lasted.
Spending time with Savannah made me wonder whether it was
possible to defy the norm. I wanted more of her, and no matter what
happened between us, I already knew I’d never forget anything
about her. As crazy as it sounded, she was becoming part of me, and
I was already dreading the fact that we wouldn’t be able to spend
the day together tomorrow. Or the day after, or the day after that.
Maybe, I told myself, we could beat the odds.
“Out there!” I heard her cry. She pointed toward the ocean. “In
the breakers.”
I scanned an ocean the color of iron but didn’t see anything.
96 Nicholas Sparks
Beside me, Savannah suddenly stood up and started running toward
the water.
“Come on!” she shouted over her shoulder. “Hurry!”
I rose and started after her, puzzled. Breaking into a run, I closed
the gap between us. She stopped at the water’s edge, and I could
hear her breaths coming fast.
“What’s going on?” I said.
“Right there!”
When I squinted, I saw what she’d been referring to. Three of
them were riding the waves, one after the next, then disappearing
from view in the shallows, only to reappear again a little ways down
the beach.
“Young porpoises,” I said. “They pass by the island almost every
evening.”
“I know,” she said, “but it looks like they’re surfi ng.”
“Yeah, I suppose it does. They’re just having fun. Now that
everyone’s out of the water, they feel like it’s safe to play.”
“I want to go in with them. I’ve always wanted to swim with the
dolphins.”
“They’ll stop playing, or they’ll just move down the beach to
where you can’t reach them. They’re funny that way. I’ve seen them
while surfi ng. If they’re curious, they’ll come within a few feet and
give you the once-over, but if you try to follow them, they’ll leave
you in the dust.”
We continued to watch the porpoises as they moved away from
us, eventually vanishing from view under a sky that had grown
opaque.
“We should probably get going,” I said.
We made our way back to the car, stopping to pick up the
remains from our dinner.
“I’m not sure the band will be playing yet, but it shouldn’t be
long.”
“It doesn’t matter,” she said. “I’m sure we can fi nd something to
do. Besides, I should warn you, I’m not much of a dancer.”
DEAR JOHN 97
“We don’t have to go if you don’t want to. We could go someplace
else if you’d like.”
“Like where?’
“Do you like ships?”
“What kind of ships?”
“Big ones,” I said. “I know this place where we can see the USS
North Carolina.”
She made a funny face, and I knew the answer was no. Not for
the fi rst time did I wish I had my own place. Then again, I was
under no illusions that she’d follow me home if I did. If I were her,
I wouldn’t go either. I’m only human.
“Wait,” she said, “I know where we can go. I want to show you
something.”
Intrigued, I asked, “Where?”
Considering Savannah’s group had started their work only yesterday,
the house was surprisingly far along. Most of the framing was
already fi nished, and the roof had been raised as well. Savannah
stared out the window of the car before turning to me.
“Would you like to walk around? See what we’re doing?”
“I’d love to,” I said.
I followed her out of the car, noting the play of moonlight on
her features. As I stepped onto the dirt of the work site, I realized
I could hear songs from a radio emanating from one of the kitchen
windows of the neighbors. A few steps from the entrance, Savannah
motioned around the structure with obvious pride. I moved
close enough to slip my arm around her, and she tilted her head
against my shoulder as she relaxed into me.
“This is where I’ve spent the last couple of days,” she almost
whispered in the nighttime quiet. “What do you think?”
“It’s great,” I said. “I’ll bet the family is thrilled.”
“They are. And they’re such a great family. They really deserve
this place since it’s been such a struggle for them. Hurricane Fran
destroyed their home, but like so many others, they didn’t have
98 Nicholas Sparks
fl ood insurance. It’s a single mom with three kids—her husband
ran out on her years ago—and if you met the family, you’d love
them. The kids all get good grades and sing in the youth choir at
church. And they’re just so polite and gracious . . . you can tell
their mom has worked hard to make sure they turn out right, you
know?”
“You’ve met them, I take it?”
She nodded toward the house. “They’ve been here the last
couple of days.” She straightened. “Would you like to look around
inside?”
Reluctantly, I let her go. “Lead the way.”
It wasn’t a large place—about the same size as my dad’s—but
the fl oor plan was more open, which made it seem larger. Savannah
took me by the hand and walked me through each room,
pointing out features, her imagination fi lling in the detail. She
mused about the ideal wallpaper for the kitchen and the color of
tile in the entryway, the fabric of the curtains in the living room,
and how to decorate the mantel over the fi replace. Her voice
conveyed the same wonder and joy she’d expressed when seeing
the porpoises. For an instant, I had a vision of what she must have
been like as a child.
She led me back to the front door. In the distance, the fi rst
rumblings of thunder could be heard. As we stood in the doorway,
I drew her near.
“There’s going to be a porch, too,” she said, “with enough room
for a couple of rocking chairs, or even a swing. They’ll be able to
sit out here on summer nights, and congregate here after church.”
She pointed. “That’s their church right over there. That’s why this
location is so perfect for them.”
“You sound like you really got to know them.”
“No, not really,” she said. “I talked to them a little bit, but I’m
just guessing about all this. I’ve done that with every house I’ve
helped to build—I walk through and try to imagine what the
DEAR JOHN 99
owners’ lives will be like. It makes working on the house a lot
more fun.”
The moon was now hidden by clouds, darkening the sky. On
the horizon, lightning fl ashed, and a moment later a soft rain began
to fall, pattering against the roof. The oak trees lining the
street, heavy with leaves, rustled in the breeze as thunder echoed
through the house.
“If you want to go, we should probably leave before the storm
hits.”
“We don’t have anywhere to go, remember? Besides, I’ve always
loved thunderstorms.”
I pulled her closer, breathing in her scent. Her hair smelled
sweet, like ripe strawberries.
As we watched, the rain intensifi ed into a steady downpour,
falling diagonally from the sky. Streetlamps provided the only
light, casting half of Savannah’s face in shadow.
Thunder exploded overhead, and the rain began coming down
in sheets. I could see the rain blowing onto the sawdust-covered
fl oor, forming wide puddles in the dirt, and I was thankful that
despite the rain, the temperature was warm. Off to the side, I spotted
some empty crates. I left her side to collect them, then began
to stack them into a makeshift seat. It wouldn’t be all that comfortable,
but it would be better than standing.
As Savannah took a seat next to me, I suddenly knew that
coming here had been the right thing to do. It was the fi rst time
we’d really been alone, but as we sat side by side, it felt as though
we’d been together forever.
T
he crates, hard and unforgiving, made me question my wisdom, but Savannah didn’t seem to mind. Or pretended not to.
She leaned back, felt the edge of the rear crate press into her skin,
then sat up again.
“Sorry,” I said, “I thought it would be more comfortable.”
“It’s okay. My legs are exhausted and my feet hurt. This is
perfect.”
Yes, I thought, it was. I thought back to nights on guard duty,
when I’d imagine sitting beside the girl of my dreams and feeling all
was right with the world. I knew now what I’d been missing all these
years. When I felt Savannah rest her head on my shoulder, I found
myself wishing I hadn’t joined the army. I wished I weren’t stationed
overseas, and I wished I’d chosen a different path in life, one that
would have let me remain a part of her world. To be a student at
Chapel Hill, to spend part of my summer building houses, to ride
horses with her.
“You’re awful quiet,” I heard her say.
“Sorry,” I said. “I was just thinking about tonight.”
“Good things, I hope.”
“Yeah, good things,” I said.
She shifted in her seat, and I felt her leg brush against mine. “Me
Eight
....Z....
DEAR JOHN 101
too. But I was thinking about your dad,” she said. “Has he always
been like he was tonight? Kind of shy and glancing away when he
talks to people?”
“Yeah,” I said. “Why?”
“Just curious,” she said.
A few feet away, the storm seemed to be reaching its climax as
another sheet of rain broke from the clouds. Water poured off all
sides of the house like waterfalls. Lightning fl ashed again, closer
this time, and thunder crashed like a cannon. Had there been
windows, I imagined they would have rattled in their casings.
Savannah scooted closer, and I put my arm around her. She
crossed her legs at the ankles and leaned against me, and I felt as if
I could hold her this way forever.
“You’re different from most of the guys I know,” she observed,
her voice low and intimate in my ear. “More mature, less . . . fl ighty,
I guess.”
I smiled, liking what she said. “And don’t forget my crew cut
and tattoos.”
“Crew cut, yes. Tattoos . . . well, they sort of come with the
package, but no one’s perfect.”
I nudged her and pretended to be wounded. “Well, had I known
how you feel, I wouldn’t have got them.”
“I don’t believe you,” she said, pulling back. “But I’m sorry—I
shouldn’t have said that. I was speaking more about how I’d feel
about getting one. On you, they do tend to project a certain . . .
image, and I suppose it fi ts.”
“What image is that?”
She pointed to the tattoos, one by one, starting with the Chinese
character. “This one tells me that you live life by your own rules and
don’t always care what people think. The infantry one shows that
you’re proud of what you do. And the barbed wire . . . well, that goes
with who you were when you were younger.”
“That’s quite the psychological profi le. Here I thought it was just
that I liked the designs.”
102 Nicholas Sparks
“I’m thinking about getting a minor in psychology.”
“I think you already have one.”
Though the wind had picked up, the rain fi nally began to slow.
“Have you ever been in love?” she asked, switching gears
suddenly.
Her question surprised me. “That came out of the blue.”
“I’ve been told that being unpredictable adds to the mysteriousness
of women.”
“Oh, it does. But to answer your question, I don’t know.”
“How can you not know?”
I hesitated, trying to think of what to say. “I dated a girl a few
years back, and at the time, I knew I was in love. At least, that’s
what I’d told myself. But now, when I think back, I’m just . . . not
sure anymore. I cared about her and I enjoyed spending time with
her, but when we weren’t together, I barely thought about her. We
were together, but we weren’t a couple, if that makes any sense.”
She considered my answer but said nothing. In time, I turned
toward her. “How about you? Have you ever been in love?”
Her face clouded. “No,” she said.
“But you thought you were. Like me, right?” When she inhaled
sharply, I went on. “In my squad, I have to use a bit of psychology,
too. And my instincts tell me there was a serious boyfriend in
your past.”
She smiled, but there was something sad in it. “I knew you’d
fi gure it out,” she said in a subdued voice. “But to answer your
question, yes, there was. During my freshman year in college. And
yes, I did think I loved him.”
“Are you sure you didn’t love him?”
It took her a long time to answer. “No,” she murmured. “I’m
not.”
I stared at her. “You don’t have to tell me—”
“It’s okay,” she said, raising her hand to cut me off. “But it’s
hard. I’ve tried to forget about it, and it’s something that I’ve
never even told my parents. Or anyone, for that matter. It’s such
DEAR JOHN 103
a cliché, you know? Small-town girl goes off to college and meets
a handsome senior, who’s also president of his fraternity. He’s
popular and rich and charming, and the little freshman is awed
that he could be interested in someone like her. He treats her
like she’s special, and she knows that other freshman girls are
jealous, so she begins to feel special, too. She agrees to go to the
winter formal at one of these fancy out-of-town hotels with him
and some other couples, even though she’s been warned that the
guy isn’t as kind or sensitive as he appears to be, and that in
reality, he’s the kind of boy who carves notches in his bed frame
for every girl he’s had.”
She closed her eyes, as if summoning the energy to continue.
“She goes against the better judgment of her friends, and even
though she doesn’t drink and he happily brings her a soda, she starts
getting woozy anyway, and he offers to take her back to the hotel
room so she can lie down. And the next thing she knows, they’re
on the bed kissing, and she likes it at fi rst, but the room is really
spinning, and it doesn’t occur to her until later that maybe someone—
maybe him—put something in her drink and that carving
another notch with her name on it had been his goal all along.”
Her words began to come faster, tumbling over one another.
“And then he starts groping at her breasts and her dress gets torn
and then her panties get torn, too, but he’s on top of her and he’s so
heavy and she can’t get him off, and she feels really helpless and
wants him to stop since she’s never done this before, but by then
she’s so dizzy she can barely talk and can’t call for help, and he probably
would have had his way with her except that another couple
who was staying in the room happened to show up, and she staggers
out of the room crying and holding her dress. Somehow she fi nds
her way to the lobby bathroom and keeps crying there, and other
girls she’d traveled to the formal with come in and see the smeared
mascara and torn dress and instead of being supportive, they laugh
at her, acting like she should have known what was coming and got
what she deserved. Finally she ends up calling a friend who hopped
104 Nicholas Sparks
in his car and drove out there to pick her up, and he was smart
enough not to ask any questions the whole way back.”
By the time she fi nished, I was rigid with anger. I’m no saint
with women, but I’ve never once in my life considered forcing a
woman to do something she rather wouldn’t.
“I’m sorry,” was all I could muster.
“You don’t have to be sorry. You didn’t do it.”
“I know. But I don’t know what else to say. Unless . . .” I trailed
off, and after a moment she turned to me. I could see the tears running
down her cheeks, and the fact that she’d been crying so silently
made me ache.
“Unless what?”
“Unless you want me to . . . I don’t know. Beat the crap out
of him?”
She gave me a sad little laugh. “You have no idea how many
times I’ve wanted to do just that.”
“I will,” I said. “Just give me a name, but I promise to leave you
out of it. I’ll do the rest.”
She squeezed my hand. “I know you would.”
“I’m serious,” I said.
She gave a wan smile, looking simultaneously world-weary and
painfully young. “That’s why I won’t tell you. But believe me, I’m
touched. That’s sweet of you.”
I liked the way she said it, and we sat together, hands clasped
tightly. The rain had fi nally stopped, and in its place I could hear
the sounds of the radio next door again. I didn’t know the song,
but I recognized it as something from the early jazz era. One of the
guys in my unit was a fanatic about jazz.
“But anyway,” she went on, “that’s what I meant when I said it
wasn’t always easy my freshman year. And it was the reason I
wanted to quit school. My parents, bless their hearts, thought that
I was homesick, so they made me stay. But . . . as bad as it was, I
learned something about myself. That I could go through something
like that and survive. I mean, I know it could have been
DEAR JOHN 105
worse—a lot worse—but for me, it was all I could have handled
at the time. And I learned from it.”
When she fi nished, I found myself remembering something
she’d said. “Was Tim the one who brought you back from the
hotel that night?”
She looked up, startled.
“Who else would you call?” I said by way of explanation.
She nodded. “Yeah, I guess you’re right. And he was great. To
this day, he hasn’t asked about the specifi cs, and I haven’t told
him. But since then he’s been a little protective, and I can’t say
that I mind.”
In the silence, I thought about the courage she had shown, not
only that night, but afterward. Had she not told me, I would never
have suspected anything bad had ever happened to her. I marveled
that despite what happened, she had managed to hold on to
her optimistic view of the world.
“I promise to be a perfect gentleman,” I said.
She turned to me. “What are you talking about?”
“Tonight. Tomorrow night. Whenever. I’m not like that guy.”
She traced a fi nger along my jaw, and I felt my skin tingle beneath
her touch. “I know,” she said, sounding amused. “Why do
you think I’m here with you now?”
Her voice was so tender, and again, I suppressed the urge to kiss
her. It wasn’t what she needed, not now, even though it was diffi
cult to think of anything else.
“Do you know what Susan said after that fi rst night? Once you
left and I went back to the group?”
I waited.
“She said you looked scary. Like you were the last person on
earth she would have ever wanted to be alone with.”
I grinned. “I’ve been told worse,” I assured her.
“No, you’re missing my point. My point is that I remember
thinking that she didn’t know what she was talking about, because
when you fi rst handed me my bag on the beach, I saw honesty and
106 Nicholas Sparks
confi dence and even something tender, but nothing frightening
at all. I know it sounds crazy, but it felt like I already knew you.”
I turned away without responding. Below the streetlamp, mist
was rising from the ground, a remnant of the heat of the day. Crickets
had begun to sound, singing to one another. I swallowed, trying
to soothe the sudden dryness in my throat. I looked at Savannah,
then up to the ceiling, then to my feet, and fi nally back to Savannah
again. She squeezed my hand, and I drew a shaky breath, marveling
at the fact that while on an ordinary leave in an ordinary
place, I’d somehow fallen in love with an extraordinary girl named
Savannah Lynn Curtis.
She saw my expression but misinterpreted it. “I’m sorry if I
made you uncomfortable,” she whispered. “I do that sometimes.
Act too forward, I mean. I just blurt out what I’m thinking without
taking into account how it might come across to others.”
“You didn’t make me uncomfortable,” I said, turning her face
to me. “I’ve just never had anyone say anything like that to me
before.”
I almost stopped there, aware that if I kept the words inside, the
moment would pass and I would escape without putting my feelings
on the line.
“You have no idea how much the last few days have meant to
me,” I began. “Meeting you has been the best thing that’s ever
happened to me.” I hesitated, knowing that if I stopped now, I’d
never be able to say it to anyone. “I love you,” I whispered.
I had always imagined the words would be hard to say, but they
weren’t. In all my life, I’d never been as sure of anything, and as
much as I hoped to one day hear Savannah say these words to me,
what mattered most was knowing that love was mine to give, without
strings or expectations.
Outside, the air was beginning to cool, and I could see pools of
water shimmering in the moonlight. The clouds had begun to break
up, and between them, an occasional star blinked, as if to remind
me of what I’d just admitted.
DEAR JOHN 107
“Did you ever imagine something like this?” she wondered
aloud. “You and me, I mean?”
“No,” I said.
“It scares me a little.”
My stomach fl ipped, and all at once, I was sure she didn’t feel
the same way.
“You don’t have to say it back to me,” I began. “That’s not why
I said it—”
“I know,” she interrupted. “You don’t understand. I wasn’t scared
because you told me. I got scared because I wanted to say it, too: I
love you, John.”
Even now, I’m still not sure how it happened. One instant we
were talking, and in the next she leaned toward me. For a second,
I wondered whether kissing her would break the spell we both
were under, but it was too late to stop. And when her lips met
mine, I knew that I could live to be a hundred and visit every
country in the world, but nothing would ever compare to that
single moment when I fi rst kissed the girl of my dreams and knew
that my love would last forever.
W
e ended up staying out late. After we left the house, I took Savannah back to the beach, and we walked the long
stretch of sand until she began to yawn. I walked her to the door,
and we kissed again as moths darted in the porch light.
Although it seemed I’d been thinking about Savannah a lot the
day before, it didn’t compare with how obsessed I was the following
day, though the feeling was different. I found myself smiling
for no good reason, something even my father noticed when he
got home from work. He didn’t comment on it—I hadn’t expected
him to, of course—but he didn’t seem surprised when I patted his
back upon learning that he planned on making lasagna. I talked
endlessly about Savannah, and after a couple of hours, he wandered
back to his den. Even though he’d said little, I think he was
happy for me and even more pleased that I’d been willing to share.
I was sure of it when I got home later that night and found a platter
of fresh-baked peanut-butter cookies on the counter, along
with a note that informed me that plenty of milk could be found
in the refrigerator.
I took Savannah out for ice cream, then drove her to the touristy
part of downtown Wilmington. We strolled through the shops,
Nine
....Z....
DEAR JOHN 109
where I discovered she had an interest in antiques. Later I took her
to see the battleship, but we didn’t stay long. She’d been right; it
was boring. Afterward, I took her home, where we sat around the
bonfi re with her housemates.
The next two nights, Savannah came over to my house. My dad
cooked both evenings. On the fi rst evening, Savannah asked my
dad nothing about coins, and conversation was a struggle. My dad
mainly listened, and though Savannah kept up a pleasant front and
tried to include him, force of habit led the two of us to talk to each
other while my dad focused on his plate. When she left, Savannah’s
brow was creased, and though I didn’t want to believe that her
initial impression of him had changed, I knew that it had.
Surprisingly, she asked to return the following evening, where
once again she and my father found themselves in the den, discussing
coins. As I watched them, I wondered what Savannah was
making of a situation that I’d long since grown used to. At the
same time, I prayed that she would be more understanding than I
had once been. By the time we left, I realized that I’d had nothing
to worry about. Instead, as we drove back to the beach, she spoke
about my dad in glowing terms, particularly praising the job he’d
done raising me. While I wasn’t sure what to make of it, I breathed
a sigh of relief that she seemed to have accepted my dad for who
he was.
By the weekend, my appearance at the beach house was becoming
a regular occurrence. Most of the people in the house had
learned my name, though they still showed little interest in me,
exhausted as they were by the day’s hard work. Most of them were
clustered around the television by seven or eight, instead of drinking
and fl irting on the beach. Everyone looked sunburned, and all
wore Band-Aids on their fi ngers to cover their blisters.
On Saturday night, people in the house had found additional
reservoirs of energy, and I showed up just as a group of guys were
unloading case after case of beer from the back of a van. I helped
110 Nicholas Sparks
carry them up and realized that since the fi rst night I’d seen Savannah,
I hadn’t had so much as a sip of alcohol. Like the weekend
before, the grill was going and we ate near the bonfi re; afterward
we went for a walk on the beach. I’d brought a blanket and a picnic
basket fi lled with late night snacks, and while lying on our backs,
we watched a show of falling stars, staring in amazement as the
fl ashes of white raced across the sky. It was one of those perfect
evenings with just enough breeze to keep us from being either hot
or cold, and we talked and kissed for hours before falling asleep in
each other’s arms.
When the sun began its rise from the sea on Sunday morning,
I sat up beside Savannah. Her face was lit with the glow of dawn,
and her hair fanned out over the blanket. She had one arm across
her chest and another above her head, and all I could think was
that I would like to spend every morning for the rest of my life
waking up beside her.
We went to church again, and Tim was his regular chipper self,
despite the fact that we’d barely spoken a word to him all week.
He asked me again whether I’d like to help on the house. I told
him that I’d be leaving the following Friday, and therefore I didn’t
know how much help I could be.
“I think you’re wearing him down,” Savannah said, smiling at
Tim.
He raised his hands. “At least you can’t say I didn’t try.”
It was perhaps the most idyllic week I’d ever spent. My feelings
for Savannah had only grown stronger, but as the days wore on, I
began to feel a gnawing anxiety at how soon all of this would be
ending. Whenever those feelings arose, I tried to force them away,
but by Sunday night, I could barely sleep. Instead, I tossed and
turned, and thought of Savannah, and tried to imagine how I could
be happy knowing she was across the ocean and surrounded by men,
one of whom might come to feel exactly the way I did about her.
* * *
DEAR JOHN 111
When I arrived at the house on Monday evening, I couldn’t fi nd
Savannah. I had someone check her room, and I poked my head
into every bathroom. She wasn’t on the deck out back or on the
beach with the others.
I went down to the beach and asked around, receiving mainly
shrugs of indifference. A couple of people hadn’t even realized she
was gone, but fi nally one of the girls—Sandy or Cindy, I wasn’t
sure—pointed down the beach and said they’d seen her head that
way about an hour earlier.
It took a long time to fi nd her. I walked the beach in both directions,
fi nally focusing on the pier near the house. On a hunch, I
climbed the stairs, hearing the waves crashing below me. When I
caught sight of Savannah, I thought she’d come out to the pier to
look for porpoises or watch the surfers. She was sitting with her
knees pulled up, leaning against a post, and it was only when I got
close that I realized she was crying.
I’d never known quite what to do when I saw a girl cry. In all
honesty, I never knew what to do when anyone cried. My father
never cried, or if he did, it was never in my presence. And the last
time I’d cried had been in the third grade, when I’d fallen from the
tree house and sprained my wrist. In my unit, I’d seen a couple of
the guys cry, and I’d usually pat them on the back and then wander
away, leaving the whys and what can I dos to someone with more
experience.
Before I could decide what to do, Savannah saw me. She hurriedly
swiped at her red and swollen eyes, and I heard her draw a
couple of steadying breaths. Her bag, the one I’d rescued from the
ocean, was sandwiched between her legs.
“Are you okay?” I asked.
“No,” she answered, and my heart clenched.
“Do you want to be alone?”
She considered it. “I don’t know,” she said at last.
Not knowing what else to do, I stood where I was.
Savannah sighed. “I’ll be okay.”
112 Nicholas Sparks
I slipped my hands in my pockets as I nodded. “Would you
rather be alone?” I asked again.
“Do I really have to tell you?”
I hesitated. “Yeah.”
She gave a melancholy laugh. “You can stay,” she said. “In fact,
it might be nice if you came and sat by me.”
I took a seat and then, after a brief period of indecision, slipped
my arm around her. For a while, we sat together without saying
anything. Savannah inhaled slowly, and her breathing became
steadier. She wiped at the tears that continued to slide down her
cheeks.
“I bought you something,” she said after a while. “I hope you’re
okay with it.”
“I’m sure it’s fi ne,” I mumbled.
She sniffl ed. “Do you know what I was thinking about when I
came out here?” She didn’t wait for an answer. “I was thinking about
us,” she said. “The way we met and how we talked that fi rst night,
how you fl ashed your tattoos and gave Randy the evil eye. And your
goofy expression when we went surfi ng the fi rst time, after I rode
the wave to shore. . . .”
When she trailed off, I squeezed her waist. “I’m sure there’s a
compliment in there somewhere.”
She tried to rally with a shaky grin but didn’t quite succeed. “I
remember everything about those fi rst few days,” she said. “And
the same goes for the whole week. Spending time with your dad,
going out for ice cream, even staring at that dumb boat.”
“We won’t go back,” I promised, but she raised her hands to
stop me.
“You’re not letting me fi nish,” she said. “And you’re missing
my point. My point is that I loved each and every moment of it,
and I didn’t expect that. I didn’t come here for that, just like I
didn’t come here to fall in love with you. Or, in a different way,
with your father.”
Chastened, I said nothing.
DEAR JOHN 113
She tucked a strand of hair behind her ear. “I think your dad is
fantastic. I think he’s done a wonderful job raising you, and I know
you don’t, and . . .”
When she seemed to run out of words, I shook my head, perplexed.
“And that’s why you were crying? Because of the way I feel
about my dad?”
“No,” she said. “Weren’t you listening?”
She paused, as if trying to organize her chaotic thoughts. “I
didn’t want to fall in love with anyone,” she said. “I wasn’t ready
for that. I’ve been through that once, and afterwards I was a mess.
I know it’s different, but you’ll be leaving in just a few days and all
this will be over . . . and I’ll be a mess again.”
“It doesn’t have to be over,” I protested.
“But it will be,” she said. “I know we can write and talk on the
phone now and then, and we could see each other when you come
home on leave. But it won’t be the same. I won’t be able to see your
silly expressions. We won’t be able to lie on the beach together and
stare at the stars. We won’t be able to sit across from each other and
talk and share secrets. And I won’t feel your arm around me, like I
do now.”
I turned away, feeling a rising sense of frustration and panic.
Everything she was saying was true.
“It just hit me today,” she went on, “while I was browsing in the
bookstore. I went there to get you a book, and when I found it, I
started imagining how you’d react when I gave it to you. The
thing was, I knew that I’d see you in just a couple of hours, and
then I would know, and that made it okay. Because even if you
were upset, I knew that we’d get through it because we could work
it out face-to-face. That’s what I came to realize while sitting out
here. That when we’re together, anything is possible.” She hesitated,
then continued. “Pretty soon, that’s not going to be possible
anymore. I’ve known since we met that you’d only be here for a
couple of weeks, but I didn’t think that it was going to be this hard
to say good-bye.”
114 Nicholas Sparks
“I don’t want to say good-bye,” I said, gently turning her face
to mine.
Beneath us, I could hear the waves crashing against the pilings.
A fl ock of seagulls passed overhead, and I leaned in to kiss her, my
lips barely brushing hers. Her breath smelled of cinnamon and
mint, and I thought again of coming home.
Hoping to take her mind off such gloomy thoughts, I gave her
a brisk squeeze and pointed at the bag. “So what book did you
buy me?”
She seemed puzzled at fi rst, then remembered she’d mentioned
it earlier. “Oh yeah, I guess it’s time for that, huh?”
By the way she said it, I suddenly knew she hadn’t bought me
the latest Hiaasen. I waited, but when I tried to meet her eyes, she
turned away.
“If I give it to you,” she said, her voice serious, “you have to
promise me that you’ll read it.”
I wasn’t quite sure what to make of it. “Sure,” I said, drawing
out the word. “I promise.”
Still, she hesitated. Then she reached into her bag and pulled
it out. When she handed it to me, I read the title. At fi rst, I didn’t
know what to think. It was a book—more like a textbook, actually—
about autism and Asperger’s. I had heard of both conditions
and assumed I knew what most people did, which wasn’t much.
“It’s by one of my professors,” she explained. “She’s the best
teacher I’ve had in college. Her classes are always fi lled, and students
who aren’t registered sometimes drop in to talk to her. She’s
one of the foremost experts in all forms of developmental disorders,
and she’s one of the few who focused her research on adults.”
“Fascinating,” I said, not bothering to hide my lack of enthusiasm.
“I think you might learn something,” she pressed.
“I’m sure,” I said. “It looks like there’s a lot of information
there.”
“There’s more to it than just that,” she said. Her voice was
DEAR JOHN 115
quiet. “I want you to read it because of your father. And the way
you two get along.”
For the fi rst time, I felt myself stiffen. “What’s that got to do
with anything?”
“I’m not an expert,” she said, “but this book was assigned both
semesters that I had her, and I must have studied it every night.
Like I said, she’s interviewed more than three hundred adults with
disorders.”
I withdrew my arm. “And?”
I knew she heard the tension in my voice, and she studied me
with a trace of apprehension.
“I know I’m only a student, but I spend a lot of my lab hours
working with children who have Asperger’s . . . I’ve seen it up
close, and I’ve also had the chance to meet a number of the
adults my professor had interviewed.” She knelt in front of me,
reaching out to touch my arm. “Your father is very similar to a
couple of them.”
I think I already knew what she was getting at, but for whatever
reason, I wanted her to say it directly. “What’s that supposed to
mean?” I demanded, forcing myself not to pull away.
Her answer was slow in coming. “I think your father might have
Asperger’s.”
“My dad isn’t retarded. . . .”
“I didn’t say that,” she said. “Asperger’s is a developmental
disorder.”
“I don’t care what it is,” I said, my voice rising. “My dad doesn’t
have it. He raised me, he works, he pays his bills. He was married
once.”
“You can have Asperger’s and still function. . . .”
As she spoke, I fl ashed on something she had said earlier.
“Wait,” I said, trying to remember how she’d phrased it and feeling
my mouth go dry. “Earlier, you said you think my dad did a wonderful
job in raising me.”
“Yeah,” she said, “and I mean that. . . .”
116 Nicholas Sparks
My jaw tightened as I fi gured out what she was really saying, and
I stared at her as if seeing her for the fi rst time. “But it’s because you
think he’s like Rain Man. That considering his problem, he did a
good job.”
“No . . . you don’t understand. There’s a spectrum of Asperger’s,
from mild to severe—”
I barely heard her. “And you respect him for the same reason.
But it’s not as if you really liked him.”
“No, wait—”
I pulled away and got to my feet. Suddenly needing space, I
walked to the railing opposite her. I thought of her continual requests
to visit with him . . . not because she wanted to spend time
with him. Because she wanted to study him.
My stomach knotted, and I faced her. “That’s why you came over,
isn’t it.”
“What—”
“Not because you liked him, but because you wanted to know
if you were right.”
“No—”
“Stop lying!” I shouted.
“I’m not lying!”
“You were sitting there with him, pretending to be interested
in his coins, but in reality you were evaluating him like some
monkey in a cage.”
“It wasn’t like that!” she said, rising to her feet. “I respect your
dad—”
“Because you think he’s got problems and overcame them,” I
snarled, fi nishing for her. “Yeah, I get it.”
“No, you’re wrong. I like your dad. . . .”
“Which is why you ran your little experiment, right?” My expression
was hard. “See, I must have forgotten that when you like someone,
you do things like that. Is that what you’re trying to say?”
She shook her head. “No!” For the fi rst time, she seemed to
DEAR JOHN 117
question what she’d done, and her lip began to quiver. When she
spoke again, her voice trembled. “You’re right. I shouldn’t have
done that. But I just wanted you to understand him.”
“Why?” I said, taking a step toward her. I could feel my muscles
tensing. “I understand him fi ne. I grew up with him, remember? I
lived with him.”
“I was trying to help,” she said, eyes downcast. “I just wanted
you to be able to relate to him.”
“I didn’t ask for your help. I don’t want your help. And why is it
any of your damn business, anyway?”
She turned away and swiped at a tear. “It’s not,” she said. Her
voice was almost inaudible. “I thought you’d want to know.”
“Know what?” I demanded. “That you think something’s wrong
with him? That I shouldn’t expect to have a normal relationship
with him? That I have to talk about coins if I want to talk to him
at all?”
I didn’t hide the anger in my voice, and from the corner of my
eyes, I saw a couple of fi shermen turn our way. My gaze kept them
from coming closer, which was probably a good thing. As we
stared at each other, I didn’t expect Savannah to answer, and
frankly, I didn’t want her to. I was still trying to get my mind
around the fact that the hours she had spent with my dad were
nothing but a charade.
“Maybe,” she whispered.
I blinked, unsure that she’d said what I thought she had.
“What?”
“You heard me.” She gave a small shrug. “Maybe that’s the only
thing you’ll ever talk about with your father. It might be all he
can do.”
I felt my hands clench into fi sts. “So you’re saying it’s all up
to me?”
I didn’t expect her to answer, but she did.
“I don’t know,” she said, meeting my eyes. I could still see her
118 Nicholas Sparks
tears, but her voice was surprisingly steady. “That’s why I bought the
book. So you can read it. Like you said, you know him better than
I do. And I never said he’s unable to function, because obviously he
does. But think about it. His unchanging routines, the fact that he
doesn’t look at people when he talks to them, his nonexistent social
life . . .”
I whirled away, wanting to hit something. Anything.
“Why are you doing this?” I asked, my voice low.
“Because if it was me, I’d want to know. And I’m not saying it
because I wanted to hurt you or insult your father. I told you because
I wanted you to understand him.”
Her candor made it painfully clear that she believed what she
was saying. Even so, I didn’t care. I turned and started up the pier.
I just wanted to get away. From here, from her.
“Where are you going?” I heard her call out. “John! Wait!”
I ignored her. Instead I picked up the pace, and a minute later
I reached the stairs of the pier. I pounded down them, hit the sand,
and headed for the house. I had no idea whether Savannah was
behind me, and as I neared the group, faces turned toward me. I
looked angry, and I knew it. Randy was holding a beer, and he
must have seen Savannah approaching because he moved to
block my path. A couple of his frat brothers did the same.
“What’s going on?” he called out. “What’s wrong with Savannah?”
I ignored him and felt him grab my wrist. “Hey, I’m talking to
you.”
Not a wise move. I could smell beer on his breath and knew
that the alcohol had given him courage.
“Let go,” I said.
“Is she okay?” he demanded.
“Let go,” I said again, “or I’ll break your wrist.”
“Hey, what’s going on?” I heard Tim call out from somewhere
behind me.
DEAR JOHN 119
“What did you do to her?” Randy demanded. “Why’s she crying?
Did you hurt her?”
I could feel the adrenaline surge into my bloodstream. “Last
chance,” I warned.
“There’s no reason for this!” Tim shouted, closer this time. “Just
relax, you guys! Knock it off!”
I felt someone try to grab me from behind. What happened
next was instinctive, over in a matter of seconds. I drove my elbow
hard into his solar plexus and heard a sudden groaning exhale;
then I grabbed Randy’s hand and quickly twisted it to its snapping
point. He screamed and dropped to his knees, and in that instant
I felt someone else rushing toward me. I swung an elbow blindly
and felt it connect; I felt cartilage crunch as I turned, ready for
whoever came next.
“What did you do?” I heard Savannah scream. She must have
come running once she saw what was going on.
On the sand, Randy was wincing as he clutched his wrist; the
guy who’d grabbed me from behind was gasping and on all fours.
“You hurt him!” she whimpered as she rushed past me. “He was
just trying to stop the fi ght!”
I turned. Tim was sprawled on the ground, holding his face,
blood gushing through his fi ngers. The sight seemed to paralyze
everyone except Savannah, who dropped to her knees at his side.
Tim moaned, and despite the hammering in my chest, I felt a
pit form in my stomach. Why did it have to be him? I wanted to
ask if he was okay; I wanted to tell him I hadn’t meant for
him to get hurt and that it wasn’t my fault. I hadn’t started it.
But it wouldn’t matter. Not now. I couldn’t pretend as if they
should forgive and forget, no matter how much I wished it hadn’t
happened.
I could barely hear Savannah fretting as I began to back away. I
eyed the others warily, making sure they’d let me leave, not wanting
to hurt anyone else.
120 Nicholas Sparks
“Oh, geez . . . oh, no. You’re really bleeding . . . we’ve got to get
you to a doctor. . . .”
I continued to back away, then turned and climbed the stairs.
I moved quickly through the house, then back down to my car.
Before I knew it, I was on the street, cursing myself and the entire
evening.
I didn’t know where to go, so I drove around aimlessly
for a while, the events of the evening replaying in my mind. I was
still angry at myself and what I’d done to Tim—not so much the
others, I admit—and angry at Savannah for what had happened
on the pier.
I could barely remember how it had started. One minute I was
thinking that I loved her more than I’d ever imagined possible,
and the next minute we were fi ghting. I was outraged by her subterfuge
yet couldn’t understand why I was this angry. It wasn’t as
if my dad and I were close; it wasn’t as if I even thought I really
knew him. So why had I been so angry? And why was I still?
Because, the little voice inside me asked, there’s a chance she
might be right?
It didn’t matter, though. Whether he was or wasn’t, so what?
How was that going to change anything? And why was it any of
her business?
As I drove, I kept veering from anger to acceptance and back
to anger again. I found myself reliving the sensation of my elbow
crushing Tim’s nose, which only made it worse. Why had he come
at me? Why not them? I wasn’t the one who’d started it.
And Savannah . . . yeah, I might be able to head over there
Ten
....Z....
tomorrow to apologize. I knew she honestly believed what she was
saying and that in her own way, she was trying to help. And
maybe, if she was right, I did want to know. It would explain
things. . . .
But after what I did to Tim? How was she going to react to
that? He was her best friend, and even if I swore it had been an
accident, would it matter to her? How about what I’d done to
the others? She knew I was a soldier, but now that she’d seen a
small part of what that meant, would she still feel the same way
about me?
By the time I found my way home, it was past midnight. I entered
the darkened house, peeked into my dad’s den, then proceeded to
the bedroom. He wasn’t up, of course; he went to bed at the same
time every night. A man of routine, as I knew and Savannah had
pointed out.
I crawled into bed, knowing I wouldn’t sleep and wishing I could
start the evening over again. From the moment she’d given me the
book, anyway. I didn’t want to think about any of it anymore. I
didn’t want to think about my dad or Savannah or what I’d done
to Tim’s nose. But all night long I stared at the ceiling, unable to
escape my thoughts.
I got up when I heard my dad in the kitchen. I was wearing the
same clothes from the evening before, but I doubted he was aware
of it.
“Mornin’, Dad,” I mumbled.
“Hey, John,” he said. “Would you like some breakfast?”
“Sure,” I said. “Coffee ready?”
“In the pot.”
I poured myself a cup. As my dad cooked, I noted the headlines
in the newspaper, knowing he would read the front section fi rst,
then metro. He would ignore the sports and life section. A man
of routine.
“How was your night?” I asked.
122 Nicholas Sparks
“The same,” he said. I wasn’t surprised when he didn’t ask me
anything in return. Instead, he ran the spatula through the scrambled
eggs. The bacon was already sizzling. In time, he turned to me,
and I already knew what he would ask.
“Would you mind putting some bread in the toaster?”
My dad left for work at exactly 7:35.
Once he was gone, I scanned the paper, uninterested in the
news, at a loss as to what to do next. I had no desire to go surfi ng,
or even to leave the house, and I was wondering whether I should
crawl back into bed to try to get some rest when I heard a car pull
up the drive. I fi gured it might be someone dropping off a fl yer
offering to clean the gutters or power-wash the mold from the
roof; I was surprised when I heard a knock.
Opening the door, I froze, caught completely off guard. Tim
shifted his weight from one foot to the other. “Hi, John,” he said.
“I know it’s early, but do you mind if I come in?”
A wide strip of medical tape bridged his nose, and the skin surrounding
both eyes was bruised and swollen.
“Yeah . . . sure,” I said, stepping aside, still trying to process the
fact that he was here.
Tim walked past me and into the living room. “I almost didn’t
find your house,” he said. “When I dropped you off before, it was
late and I can’t say I was paying that much attention. I drove by
a couple of times before it fi nally registered.”
He smiled again, and I realized he was carrying a small paper
sack.
“Would you like some coffee?” I asked, snapping out of my shock.
“I think there still might be a cup left in the pot.”
“No, I’m fi ne. I was up most of the night, and I’d rather not
have the caffeine. I’m hoping to lie down when I get back to the
house.”
I nodded. “Hey, listen . . . about what happened last night,” I
began. “I’m sorry. I didn’t mean . . .”
DEAR JOHN 123
He held up his hands to stop me. “It’s okay. I know you didn’t.
And I should have known better. I should have tried to grab one
of the other guys.”
I inspected him. “Does it hurt?”
“It’s okay,” he said. “It just happened to be one of those nights
in the emergency room. It took a while to see a doctor, and he
wanted to call someone else in to set my nose. But they swore it
would be good as new. I might have a small bump, but I’m hoping
it gives me a more rugged appearance.”
I smiled, then felt bad for doing so. “Like I said, I’m sorry.”
“I accept your apology,” he said. “And I appreciate it. But that’s
not the reason I came here.” He motioned to the couch. “Do you
mind if we sit? I still feel a little woozy.”
I sat on the edge of the recliner, leaning forward with my elbows
on my knees. Tim sat on the sofa, wincing as he got comfortable.
He set the paper bag off to the side.
“I want to talk to you about Savannah,” he said. “And about
what happened last night.”
The sound of her name brought it all back, and I glanced away.
“You know we’re good friends, right?” He didn’t wait for an
answer. “Last night in the hospital, we talked for hours, and I just
wanted to come here to ask you not to be angry with her for what
she did. She knows she made a mistake and that it wasn’t her place
to diagnose your father. You were right about that.”
“Why isn’t she here, then?”
“Right now, she’s at the site. Someone’s got to be in charge
while I recuperate. And she doesn’t know I’m here, either.”
I shook my head. “I don’t know why I got so mad in the fi rst
place.”
“Because you didn’t want to hear it,” he said, his voice quiet. “I
used to feel the same way whenever I heard someone talk about
my brother, Alan. He’s autistic.”
I looked up. “Alan’s your brother?”
“Yeah, why?” he asked. “Did Savannah tell you about him?”
124 Nicholas Sparks
DEAR JOHN 125
“A little,” I said, remembering that even more than Alan, she
talked about the brother who’d been so patient with him, who’d
inspired her to major in special education.
On the couch, Tim winced as he touched the bruising under his
eye. “And just so you know,” he went on, “I agree with you. It
wasn’t her place, and I told her so. Do you remember when I said
that she was naive sometimes? That’s what I meant. She wants to
help people, but sometimes it doesn’t come across that way.”
“It wasn’t just her,” I said. “It was me, too. Like I said, I overreacted.”
His gaze was steady. “Do you think she might be right?”
I brought my hands together. “I don’t know. I don’t think so,
but . . .”
“But you don’t know. And if so, whether it even matters,
right?”
He didn’t wait for an answer. “Been there, done that,” he said.
“I remember what my parents and I went through with Alan. For
a long time we didn’t know what, if anything, was wrong with
him. And you know what I’ve decided after all this time? It
doesn’t matter. I still love him and watch out for him, and I always
will. But . . . learning about his condition did help make things
easier between us. Once I knew . . . I guess I just stopped expecting
him to behave in a certain way. And without expectations, I found
it easier to accept him.”
I digested this. “What if he doesn’t have Asperger’s?” I asked.
“He might not.”
“And if I think he does?”
He sighed. “It’s not that simple, especially in milder cases,” he
said. “It’s not as if you can pull a vial of blood and test for it. You
might get to the point where you think it’s possible, and that’s as
far as you’ll ever get. But you’ll never know for sure. And from
what Savannah said about him, I honestly don’t think much will
change. And why should it? He works, he raised you . . . what
more could you expect from a father?”
126 Nicholas Sparks
I considered this while images of my dad fl ashed through my
head.
“Savannah bought you a book,” he said.
“I don’t know where it is,” I admitted.
“I’ve got it,” he said. “I brought it from the house.” He handed
me the paper bag. Somehow the book felt heavier than it had the
night before.
“Thanks.”
He rose, and I knew our conversation was nearing the end. He
moved to the door but turned with his hand on the knob.
“You know you don’t have to read it,” he said.
“I know.”
He opened the door, then stopped. I knew he wanted to add
something else, but, surprising me, he didn’t turn around. “Would
you mind if I asked a favor?”
“Go ahead.”
“Don’t break Savannah’s heart, okay? I know she loves you, and
I just want her to be happy.”
I knew then that I’d been right about his feelings for her. As he
walked to the car, I watched him from the window, certain that
he was in love with her, too.
I put the book aside and went for a walk; when I got back to the
house, I avoided it again. I can’t tell you why I did so, other than
that it frightened me somehow.
After a couple of hours, however, I forced the feeling away and
spent the rest of the afternoon absorbing its contents and reliving
memories of my father.
Tim had been right. There wasn’t any clear-cut diagnosis, no
hard-and-fast rules, and there was no way I’d ever know for certain.
Some people with Asperger’s had low IQs, while other, even more
severely autistic people—like the Dustin Hoffman character in Rain
Man—were regarded as geniuses in particular subjects. Some could
function so well in society that no one even knew; others had to be
DEAR JOHN 127
institutionalized. I read profi les of people with Asperger’s who were
prodigies in music or mathematics, but I learned that they were as
rare as prodigies among the general population. But most important,
I learned that when my dad was young, there were few doctors
who even understood the characteristics or symptoms and that if
something had been wrong, his parents might never have known.
Instead, children with Asperger’s or autism were often lumped with
the retarded or the shy, and if they weren’t institutionalized, parents
were left to comfort themselves with the hope that one day their
child might grow out of it. The difference between Asperger’s and
autism could sometimes be summed up by the following: A person
with autism lives in his own world, while a person with Asperger’s
lives in our world, in a way of his own choosing.
By that standard, most people could be said to have Asperger’s.
But there were some indications that Savannah had been right
about my father. His unchanging routines, his social awkwardness,
his lack of interest in topics other than coins, his desire to be
alone—all seemed like quirks that anyone might have, but with my
father it was different. While others might freely make those same
choices, my father—like some people with Asperger’s—seemed to
have been forced to live a life with these choices already predetermined.
At the very least, I learned that it might explain my father’s
behavior, and if so, it wasn’t that he wouldn’t change, but that he
couldn’t change. Even with all the implied uncertainty, I found the
realization comforting. And, I realized, it might explain two questions
that had always plagued me regarding my mother: What had
she seen in him? And why had she left?
I knew I’d never know, and I had no intention of delving further.
But with a leaping imagination in a quiet house, I could envision a
quiet man who struck up a conversation about his rare coin collection
with a poor young waitress at a diner, a woman who spent her
evenings lying in bed and dreaming of a better life. Maybe she
fl irted, or maybe she didn’t, but he was attracted to her and continued
to show up at the diner. Over time, she might have sensed the
128 Nicholas Sparks
kindness and patience in him that he would later use in raising me.
It was possible that she interpreted his quiet nature accurately as
well and knew he would be slow to anger and never violent. Even
without love, it might have been enough, so she agreed to marry
him, thinking they would sell the coins and live, if not happily ever
after, at least comfortably ever after. She got pregnant, and later,
when she learned that he couldn’t even fathom the idea of selling
the coins, she realized that she’d be stuck with a husband who
showed little interest in anything she did. Maybe her loneliness got
the better of her, or maybe she was just selfi sh, but either way she
wanted out, and after the baby was born, she took the fi rst opportunity
to leave.
Or, I thought, maybe not.
I doubted whether I would ever learn the truth, but I really didn’t
care. I did, however, care about my father, and if he was affl icted
with a bit of faulty wiring in his brain, I suddenly understood that
he’d somehow formed a set of rules for life, rules that helped him fi t
into the world. Maybe they weren’t quite normal, but he’d nonetheless
found a way to help me become the man I was. And to me, that
was more than enough.
He was my father, and he’d done his best. I knew that now. And
when at last I closed the book and set it aside, I found myself staring
out the window, thinking how proud I was of him while trying to
swallow the lump in my throat.
When he returned from work, my dad changed his clothes and
went to the kitchen to start the spaghetti. I studied him as he
went through the motions, knowing I was doing exactly the same
thing that I’d grown angry at Savannah for doing. It’s strange how
knowledge changes perception.
I noted the precision of his moves—the way he neatly opened
the box of spaghetti before setting it aside and the way he worked
the spatula in careful right angles as he browned the meat. I knew
he would add salt and pepper, and a moment later he did. I knew
DEAR JOHN 129
he would open the can of tomato sauce right after that, and again,
I wasn’t proved wrong. As usual, he didn’t ask about my day, preferring
to work in silence. Yesterday I’d attributed it to the fact
that we were strangers; today I understood that there was a possibility
we always would be. But for the fi rst time in my life, it
didn’t bother me.
Over dinner I didn’t ask about his day, knowing he wouldn’t
answer. Instead, I told him about Savannah and what our time
together had been like. Afterward, I helped him with the dishes,
continuing our one-sided conversation. Once they were done, he
reached for the rag again. He wiped the counter a second time,
then rotated the salt and pepper shakers until they were in exactly
the same position they’d been in when he arrived home. I had the
feeling that he wanted to add to the conversation and didn’t know
how, but I suppose I was trying to make myself feel better. It didn’t
matter. I knew he was ready to retreat to the den.
“Hey, Dad,” I said. “How about you show me some of the coins
you’ve bought lately? I want to hear all about them.”
He stared at me as if uncertain he’d heard me right, then glanced
at the fl oor. He touched his thinning hair, and I saw the growing
bald spot on the top of his head. When he looked up at me again,
he looked almost scared.
“Okay,” he fi nally said.
We walked to the den together, and when I felt him place a
gentle hand on my back, all I could think was that I hadn’t felt this
close to him in years.
T
he following evening, as I stood on the pier admiring the silver play of moonlight on the ocean, I wondered whether
Savannah would show. The night before, after spending hours
examining coins with my father and enjoying the excitement in
his voice as he described them, I drove to the beach. On the seat
beside me was the note I’d written to Savannah, asking her to
meet me here. I’d left the note in an envelope I’d placed on Tim’s
car. I knew that he would pass along the envelope unopened, no
matter how much he might not want to. In the short time I’d
known him, I’d come to believe that Tim, like my father, was a far
better person than I would ever be.
It was the only thing I could think to do. Because of the altercation,
I knew I was no longer welcome at the beach house; I also
didn’t want to see Randy or Susan or any of the others, which made
it impossible to contact Savannah. She didn’t have a cell phone,
nor did I know the phone number at the beach house, which left
the note as my only option.
I was wrong. I’d overreacted, and I knew it. Not just with her,
but with the others on the beach. I should have simply walked
away. Randy and his buddies, even if they lifted weights and considered
themselves athletes, didn’t stand a chance against someone
Eleven
....Z....
DEAR JOHN 131
trained to disable people quickly and effi ciently. Had it happened
in Germany, I might have found myself locked up for what I’d
done. The government wasn’t too fond of those who used government-
acquired skills in ways the government didn’t approve.
So I’d left the note, then watched the clock all the next day,
wondering if she would show. As the time I had suggested came
and went, I found myself glancing compulsively over my shoulder,
breathing a sigh of relief when a fi gure appeared in the distance.
From the way it moved, I knew it had to be Savannah. I leaned
against the railing as I waited for her.
She slowed her steps when she spotted me, then came to a stop.
No hug, no kiss—the sudden formality made me ache.
“I got your note,” she said.
“I’m glad you came.”
“I had to sneak away so no one knew you were here,” she said.
“I’ve overheard a few people talking about what they would do if
you showed up again.”
“I’m sorry,” I plunged in without preamble. “I know you were
just trying to help, and I took it the wrong way.”
“And?”
“And I’m sorry for what I did to Tim. He’s a great guy, and I
should have been more careful.”
Her gaze was unblinking. “And?”
I shuffl ed my feet, knowing I wasn’t really sincere in what I was
about to say, but knowing she wanted to hear it anyway. I sighed.
“And Randy and the other guy, too.”
Still, she continued to stare. “And?”
I was stumped. I searched my mind before meeting her eyes.
“And . . .” I trailed off.
“And what?”
“And . . .” I tried but couldn’t come up with anything. “I don’t
know,” I confessed. “But whatever it is, I’m sorry for that, too.”
She wore a curious expression. “That’s it?”
I thought about it. “I don’t know what else to say,” I admitted.
132 Nicholas Sparks
It was half a second before I noticed the tiniest hint of a smile.
She moved toward me. “That’s it?” she repeated, her voice softer.
I said nothing. She came closer and, surprising me, slipped her
arms around my neck.
“You don’t have to apologize,” she whispered. “There’s no reason
to be sorry. I probably would have reacted the same way.”
“Then why the inquisition?”
“Because,” she said, “it let me know that I was right about you
in the fi rst place. I knew you had a good heart.”
“What are you talking about?”
“Just what I said,” she answered. “Later—after that night, I
mean—Tim convinced me that I had no right to say what I did.
You were right. I don’t have the ability to do any sort of professional
evaluation, but I was arrogant enough to think I did. As for
what happened on the beach, I saw the whole thing. It wasn’t your
fault. Even what happened to Tim wasn’t your fault, but it was nice
to hear you apologize anyway. If only to know you could do it in
the future.”
She leaned into me, and when I closed my eyes, I knew I wanted
nothing more than to hold her this way forever.
Later, after we’d spent a good part of the night talking and kissing
on the beach, I ran my fi nger along her jaw and whispered,
“Thank you.”
“For what?”
“For the book. I think I understand my dad a little better now.
We had a good time last night.”
“I’m glad.”
“And thanks for being who you are.”
When she wrinkled her brow, I kissed her forehead. “If it wasn’t
for you,” I added, “I wouldn’t have been able to say that about my
dad. You don’t know how much that means to me.”
* * *
DEAR JOHN 133
Though she was supposed to work at the site the following day, Tim
had been understanding when she explained that it would be the last
chance for us to see each other before I returned to Germany. When
I picked her up, he walked down the steps of the house and squatted
next to the car, at eye level with the window. The bruises had darkened
to deep black. He stuck his hand through the window.
“It was a pleasure meeting you, John.”
“You too,” I said, meaning it.
“Keep safe, okay?”
“I’ll try,” I answered as we shook hands, struck by the feeling that
there was a connection between us.
Savannah and I spent the morning at the Fort Fisher Aquarium,
bewitched by the strange creatures displayed there. We saw gar
with their long noses, and miniature sea horses; in the largest tank
were nurse sharks and red drum. We laughed as we handled the
hermit crabs, and Savannah bought me a souvenir key chain from
the gift shop. For some strange reason there was a penguin on it,
which amused her no end.
Afterward, I took her to a sunny restaurant near the water, and
we held hands across the table as we watched the sailboats rocking
gently in their slips. Lost in each other, we barely noticed the waiter,
who had to come to the table three times before we’d even opened
our menus.
I marveled at the easy way Savannah showed her emotions and
the tenderness of her expression as I told her about my dad. When
she kissed me afterward, I tasted the sweetness of her breath. I
reached for her hand.
“I’m going to marry you one day, you know.”
“Is that a promise?”
“If you want it to be.”
“Well, then you have to promise that you’ll come back for me
when you get out of the army. I can’t marry you if you’re not
around.”
“It’s a deal.”
134 Nicholas Sparks
Later, we strolled the grounds of the Oswald Plantation, a beautifully
restored antebellum home that boasted some of the fi nest
gardens in the state. We walked along the gravel paths, skirting
clusters of wildfl owers that bloomed a thousand different colors in
the lazy southern heat.
“What time do you fl y out tomorrow?” she asked. The sun was
beginning its gradual descent in the cloudless sky.
“Early,” I said. “I’ll probably be at the airport before you wake
up.”
She nodded. “And you’ll spend tonight with your dad, right?”
“I was planning on it. I probably haven’t spent as much time
with him as I should have, but I’m sure he’d understand—”
She shook her head to stop me. “No, don’t change your plans.
I want you to spend time with your dad. I was hoping you would.
That’s why I’m with you today.”
We walked the length of an elaborate hedge-lined path. “So
what do you want to do?” I asked. “About us, I mean.”
“It’s not going to be easy,” she said.
“I know it won’t,” I said. “But I don’t want all this to end.” I
stopped, knowing words wouldn’t be enough. Instead, from behind,
I slipped my arms around her and drew her body into mine. I kissed
her neck and ear, savoring her velvety skin. “I’ll call you as much as
I can, and I’ll write you when I can’t, and I’ll get another leave next
year. Wherever you are, that’s where I’ll go.”
She leaned back, trying to catch a glimpse of my face. “You
will?”
I squeezed her. “Of course. I mean, I’m not happy about leaving
you, and I wish more than anything that I was stationed nearby,
but that’s all I can promise right now. I can request a transfer as
soon as I get back, and I will, but you never know how those
things go.”
“I know,” she murmured. For whatever reason, her solemn expression
made me nervous.
DEAR JOHN 135
“Will you write me?” I asked.
“Duh,” she teased, and my nervousness disappeared. “Of course
I will,” she said, smiling. “How can you even bother to ask? I’ll write
you all the time. And just so you know, I write the best letters.”
“I don’t doubt it.”
“I’m serious,” she said. “In my family, that’s what we do on just
about every holiday. We write letters to those people who we care
a lot about. We tell them what they mean to us and how much we
look forward to the time when we’ll get to see them again.”
I kissed her neck again. “So what do I mean to you? And how
much are you looking forward to seeing me again?”
She leaned back. “You’ll have to read my letters.”
I laughed, but I felt my heart breaking. “I’m going to miss you,”
I said.
“I’ll miss you, too.”
“You don’t sound too broken up about it.”
“That’s because I already cried about it, remember? Besides, it’s
not like I’ll never see you again. That’s what I fi nally realized.
Yeah, it’ll be hard, but life moves fast—we’ll see each other again.
I know that. I can feel that. Just like I can feel how much you care
for me and how much I love you. I know in my heart that this isn’t
over, and that we’ll make it through this. Lots of couples do.
Granted, lots of couples don’t, but they don’t have what we
have.”
I wanted to believe her. I wanted it more than anything, but I
wondered if it was really that simple.
When the sun had disappeared below the horizon, we walked
back to the car, and I drove her to the beach house. I stopped a
little way down the street so no one in the house could see us,
and when we got out of the car, I put my arms around her. We
kissed and I held her close, knowing for certain that the next year
would be the longest in my life. I wished fervently that I’d never
joined up, that I were a free man. But I wasn’t.
136 Nicholas Sparks
“I should probably be going.”
She nodded, beginning to cry. I felt a knot form in my chest.
“I’ll write you,” I promised.
“Okay,” she said. She swiped at her tears and reached into her
handbag. She pulled out a pen and a small slip of paper. She began
scribbling. “This is my home address and phone number, okay? And
my e-mail address, too.”
I nodded.
“Remember that I’ll be changing dorms next year, but I’ll let you
know my new address as soon as I get it. But you can always reach
me through my parents. They’ll forward anything you send.”
“I know,” I said. “You still have my information, right? Even if
I go on a mission somewhere, letters will reach me. E-mail, too.
The army’s pretty good at setting up computers, even in the
middle of nowhere.”
She hugged her arms like a forlorn child. “It scares me,” she
said. “You being a soldier, I mean.”
“I’ll be okay,” I reassured her.
I opened the car door, then reached for my wallet. I slipped the
note she scribbled inside, then opened my arms again. She came to
me and I held her for a long time, imprinting the feel of her body
against mine.
This time, it was she who pulled away. She reached into her
handbag again and pulled out an envelope.
“I wrote this for you last night. To give you something to read
on the plane. Don’t read it until then, okay?”
I nodded and kissed her one last time, then slipped behind the
wheel of the car. I started the car, and as I began to pull away, she
called out, “Say hello to your father. Tell him that I might stop by
sometime in the next couple of weeks, okay?”
She took a step backward as the car began to roll. I could still
see her through the rearview mirror. I thought about stopping.
My dad would understand. He knew how much Savannah meant
to me, and he would want us to have one last evening together.
DEAR JOHN 137
But I kept moving, watching her image in the mirror grow
smaller and smaller, feeling my dream slip away.
Dinner with my dad was quieter than usual. I didn’t have the
energy to attempt a conversation, and even my dad realized it. I
sat at the table as he cooked, but instead of focusing on the
preparation, he glanced my way every now and then with muted
concern in his eyes. I was startled when he turned off the burner
and approached me.
When close, he put a hand on my back. He said nothing, but he
didn’t have to. I knew he understood that I was hurting, and he
stood without moving, as if trying to absorb my pain in the hope of
taking it from me and making it his own.
In the morning, Dad drove me to the airport and stood beside me
at the gate while I waited for my fl ight to be called. When it was
time, I rose. My dad held out his hand; I hugged him instead. His
body was rigid, but I didn’t care. “Love you, Dad.”
“I love you, too, John.”
“Find some good coins, okay?” I added, pulling back. “I want to
hear all about them.”
He glanced at the fl oor. “I like Savannah,” he said. “She’s a
nice girl.”
It came out of the blue, but somehow it was exactly what I
wanted to hear.
On the plane, I sat with the letter Savannah had written me,
holding it in my lap. Though I wanted to open it immediately, I
waited until we’d lifted off from the runway. From the window, I
could see the coastline, and I searched fi rst for the pier, then the
house. I wondered whether she was still sleeping, but I wanted to
think that she was out on the beach and watching for the plane.
When I was ready, I opened the envelope. In it, she’d placed a
photograph of herself, and I suddenly wished I had left her one of
138 Nicholas Sparks
me. I stared at her face for a long time, then set it aside. I took a
deep breath and began to read.
Dear John,
There’s so much I want to say to you, but I’m not sure where
I should begin. Should I start by telling you that I love you? Or
that the days I’ve spent with you have been the happiest in my life?
Or that in the short time I’ve known you, I’ve come to believe
that we were meant to be together? I could say all those things and
all would be true, but as I reread them, all I can think is that I
wish I were with you now, holding your hand and watching for
your elusive smile.
In the future, I know I’ll relive our time together a thousand
times. I’ll hear your laughter and see your face and feel your arms
around me. I’m going to miss all of that, more than you can imagine.
You’re a rare gentleman, John, and I treasure that about you.
In all the time we were together, you never pressed me to sleep with
you, and I can’t tell you how much that meant to me. It made what
we had seem even more special, and that’s how I always want to
remember my time with you. Like a pure white light, breathtaking
to behold.
I’ll think about you every day. Part of me is scared that there
will come a time when you don’t feel the same way, that you’ll
somehow forget about what we shared, so this is what I want to
do. Wherever you are and no matter what’s going on in your
life, when it’s the fi rst night of the full moon—like it was the fi rst
time we met—I want you to fi nd it in the nighttime sky. I want
you to think about me and the week we shared, because wherever
I am and no matter what’s going on in my life, that’s exactly
what I’ll be doing. If we can’t be together, at least we can share
that, and maybe between the two of us, we can make this last
forever.
DEAR JOHN 139
I love you, John Tyree, and I’m going to hold you to the promise
you once made to me. If you come back, I’ll marry you. If you
break your promise, you’ll break my heart.
Love,
Savannah
Beyond the window and through the tears in my eyes, I could
see a layer of clouds spread beneath me. I had no idea where we
were. All I knew was that I wanted to turn around and go back
home, to be in the place I was meant to be.

PART I I
....Z....

Hours later, on that fi rst lonely night back in Germany,
I read the letter again, reliving our time together. It was
easy; those memories had already begun to haunt me and sometimes
seemed more real than my life as a soldier. I could feel Savannah’s
hand in mine and watched as she shook the ocean water
from her hair. I laughed aloud as I recalled my surprise when she
rode her fi rst wave to shore. My time with Savannah changed me,
and the men in my squad remarked on the difference. Over the
next couple of weeks, my friend Tony teased me endlessly, smug
in the belief that he’d fi nally been proven right about the importance
of female companionship. It was my own fault for telling
him about Savannah. Tony, however, wanted to know more than
I was willing to share. While I was reading, he sat in the seat across
from me, grinning like an idiot.
“Tell me again about your wild vacation romance,” he said.
I forced myself to keep my eyes on the page, doing my best to
ignore him.
“Savannah, right? Sa-va-nnah. Damn, I love that name. Sounds
so . . . dainty, but I’ll bet she was a tiger in the sack, right?”
“Shut up, Tony.”
“Don’t give me that. Haven’t I been the one watching out for
Twelve
....Z....
you all this time? Telling you that you gotta get out? You fi nally
listened, and now it’s payback time. I want the details.”
“It’s none of your business.”
“But you drank tequila, right? I told you it works every time.”
I said nothing. Tony threw up his hands. “Come on—you can
tell me that much, can’t you?”
“I don’t want to talk about it.”
“Because you’re in love? Yeah, that’s what you said, but I’m
beginning to think you’re making the whole thing up.”
“That’s right. I made it up. Are we done?”
He shook his head and rose from his seat. “You are one lovesick
puppy.”
I said nothing, but as he walked away, I knew he was right. I
was head over heels crazy about Savannah. I would have done
anything to be with her, and I requested a transfer to the States.
My hard-bitten commanding offi cer appeared to give it serious
consideration. When he asked why, I told him about my dad instead
of Savannah. He listened for a while, then leaned back in
his seat and said, “The odds aren’t good unless your dad’s health
is an issue.” Walking out of his offi ce, I knew I wasn’t going anywhere
for at least the next sixteen months. I didn’t bother to hide
my disappointment, and the next time the moon was full, I left
the barracks and wandered out to one of the grassy areas we used
for soccer games. I lay on my back and stared at the moon, remembering
it all and hating the fact that I was so far away.
From the very beginning, the calls and letters between us were
regular. We e-mailed as well, but I soon learned that Savannah
preferred to write, and she wanted me to do the same. “I know it’s
not as immediate as e-mail, but that’s what I like about it,” she
wrote me. “I like the surprise of fi nding a letter in the mailbox and
the anxious anticipation I feel when I’m getting ready to open it. I
like the fact that I can take it with me to read at my leisure, and
that I can lean against a tree and feel the breeze on my face when I
see your words on paper. I like to imagine the way you looked when
144 Nicholas Sparks
you wrote it: what you were wearing, your surroundings, the way
you held your pen. I know it’s a cliché and it’s probably off the mark,
but I keep thinking of you sitting in a tent at a makeshift table, with
an oil lamp burning beside you while the wind blows outside. It’s so
much more romantic than reading something on the same machine
that you use to download music or research a paper.”
I’d smiled at that. She was, after all, wrong about the tent and
the makeshift table and the oil lamp, but I had to admit that it did
paint a more interesting picture than the reality of the fl uorescentlit,
government-issued desk inside my wooden barracks.
As the days and weeks wore on, my love for Savannah seemed
to grow even stronger. Sometimes I’d sneak away from the guys to
be alone. I would take out Savannah’s photograph and hold it
close, studying every feature. It was strange, but as much as I loved
her and remembered our time together, I found that as summer
turned to autumn, then changed again to winter, I was more and
more thankful for the photograph. Yes, I convinced myself that I
could remember her exactly, but when I was honest with myself,
I knew I was losing the specifi cs. Or maybe, I realized, I’d never
noticed them at all. In the photo, for instance, I realized that
Savannah had a small mole beneath her left eye, something I’d
somehow overlooked. Or that, on close inspection, her smile was
slightly crooked. These were imperfections that somehow made
her perfect in my eyes, but I hated the fact that I had to use the
picture to learn about them.
Somehow, I went on with my life. As much as I thought about
Savannah, as much as I missed her, I had a job to do. Beginning
in September—owing to a set of circumstances that even the army
had trouble explaining—my squad and I were sent to Kosovo for
the second time to join the First Armored Division on yet another
peacekeeping mission while pretty much everyone else in the
infantry was being sent back to Germany. It was relatively calm
and I didn’t fi re my gun, but that didn’t mean I spent my days
picking fl owers and pining for Savannah. I cleaned my gun, kept
DEAR JOHN 145
watch for any crazies, and when you’re forced to be alert for hours,
you’re tired by nightfall. I can honestly say I could go two or three
days without wondering what Savannah was doing or even thinking
about her. Did this make my love less real? I asked myself that
question dozens of times during that trip, but I always decided it
didn’t, for the simple reason that her image would ambush me
when I least expected it, overwhelming me with the same ache I
had the day I’d left. Anything might set it off: a friend talking
about his wife, the sight of a couple holding hands, or even the
way some of the villagers would smile as we passed.
Savannah’s letters arrived every ten days or so, and they’d piled
up by the time I got back to Germany. None was like the letter I’d
read on the plane; mostly they were casual and chatty, and she
saved the truth of her feelings until the very end. In the meantime,
I learned the details of her daily life: that they’d fi nished the fi rst
house a little behind schedule, which made things tougher when
it came to building the second house. For that one, they had to
work longer hours, even though everyone involved had grown
more effi cient at their tasks. I learned that after they completed the
fi rst house, they had thrown a big party for the entire neighborhood
and that they’d been toasted over and over as the afternoon
wore on. I learned that the work crew had celebrated by going to
the Shrimp Shack and that Tim had pronounced it to have the
greatest atmosphere of any restaurant he’d been to. I learned that
she got most of her fall classes with the teachers she’d requested
and that she was excited to be taking adolescent psychology with
a Dr. Barnes, who’d just had a major article published in some esoteric
psychology journal. I didn’t need to believe that Savannah
thought of me every time she pounded a nail or was helping to slide
a window into place, or think that in the midst of a conversation
with Tim, she would always wish it were me she was talking to. I
liked to think that what we had was deeper than that, and over
time, that belief made my love for her grow even stronger.
Of course, I did want to know that she still cared about me, and
146 Nicholas Sparks
in this, Savannah never let me down. I suppose that was the reason
I saved every letter she ever sent. Toward the end of each letter,
there would always be a few sentences, maybe even a paragraph,
where she would write something that made me pause, words that
made me remember, and I would fi nd myself rereading passages and
trying to imagine her voice as I read them. Like this, from the second
letter I received:
When I think of you and me and what we shared, I know it would
be easy for others to dismiss our time together as simply a by-product
of the days and nights spent by the sea, a “fl ing” that, in the long
run, would mean absolutely nothing. That’s why I don’t tell people
about us. They wouldn’t understand, and I don’t feel the need to
explain, simply because I know in my heart how real it was. When
I think of you, I can’t help smiling, knowing that you’ve completed
me somehow. I love you, not just for now, but for always, and I
dream of the day that you’ll take me in your arms again.
Or this, from the letter after I’d sent her a photograph of me:
And fi nally, I want to thank you for the picture. I’ve already
put it in my wallet. You look healthy and happy, but I have to tell
you that I cried when I saw it. Not because it made me sad—
though it did, since I know I won’t be able to see you—but because
it made me happy. It reminded me that you’re the best thing
that’s ever happened to me.
And this, from a letter she’d written while I’d been in Kosovo:
I have to say that your last letter worried me. I want to hear
about it, I need to hear about it, but I fi nd myself holding my
breath and getting scared for you whenever you tell me what your
life is really like. Here I am, getting ready to go home for Thanksgiving
and worrying about tests, and you’re someplace dangerous,
DEAR JOHN 147
surrounded by people who want to hurt you. I just wish those
people could know you like I know you, because then you’d be
safe. Just like I feel safe when I’m in your arms.
Christmas that year was a dismal affair, but it’s always dismal
when you’re far from home. It wasn’t my fi rst Christmas alone
during my years in the service. Every holiday had been spent in
Germany, and a couple of guys in our barracks had rigged up a tree
of sorts—a green tarp braced with a stick and decorated with
blinking lights. More than half of my buddies had gone home—I
was one of the unlucky ones who had to stay in case our friends
the Russians got it in their heads that we were still mortal enemies—
and most of the others trooped into town to celebrate
Christmas Eve by getting bombed on quality German beer. I’d
already opened the package Savannah had sent me—a sweater
that reminded me of something Tim would wear and a batch of
homemade cookies—and knew she’d already received the perfume
I’d sent her. But I was alone, and as a gift to myself, I splurged
on a phone call to Savannah. She hadn’t expected the call, and I
replayed the excitement in her voice for weeks afterward. We
ended up talking for more than an hour. I had missed the sound
of her voice. I’d forgotten her lilting accent and the twang that
grew more pronounced whenever she started speaking quickly. I
leaned back in my chair, imagining that she was with me and
listening as she described the falling snow. At the same time, I
realized it was snowing outside my window as well, which, if only
for an instant, made it feel as if we were together.
By January 2001, I had begun to count down the days to when
I’d see her again. My summer leave was coming in June, and I’d
be out of the army in less than a year. I’d wake up in the morning
and literally tell myself that there were 360 days left, then 359 and
358 till I was out, but I’d see Savannah in 178, then 177 and 176
and so on. It was tangible and real, close enough to allow me to
dream of moving back to North Carolina; on the other hand, it
148 Nicholas Sparks
unfortunately made time slow down. Isn’t that the way it always
is when you really want something? It reminded me of being a kid
and the lengthening days as I waited for summer vacation. Had it
not been for Savannah’s letters, I have no doubt that the wait
would have seemed much longer.
My dad wrote as well. Not with the frequency of Savannah, but
on his own regular monthly schedule. To my surprise, his letters
were two or three times longer than the page or so I’d been used to.
The additional pages were exclusively about coins. In my spare
time, I’d visit the computer center and do a bit of research on my
own. I’d search for certain coins, collect the history, and send the
information back in a letter of my own. I swear, the fi rst time I did
that, I thought I saw tears on the next letter he sent me. No, not
really—I know it was just my imagination since he never even
mentioned what I’d done—but I wanted to believe that he pored
over the data with the same intensity he used when studying the
Greysheet.
In February, I was shipped off on maneuvers with other NATO
troops: one of those “pretend we’re in a battle in 1944 exercises,”
in which we were supposedly facing an onslaught of tanks through
the German countryside. Kind of pointless, if you ask me. Those
kinds of wars are long since over, gone the way of Spanish galleons
blasting their close-range cannons and the U.S. Cavalry riding
horseback to the rescue. These days, they never say who the enemies
are supposed to be, but everyone knows it’s the Russians,
which makes even less sense, since they’re supposed to be our allies
now. But even if they weren’t, the simple fact is that they don’t
have that many working tanks anymore, and even if they were
secretly building thousands at some plant in Siberia with the intent
of overrunning Europe, any advancing wave of tanks would most
likely be confronted with air strikes and our own mechanized divisions
instead of the infantry. But what did I know, right? The
weather was miserable, too, with some freakishly angry cold front
moving down from the arctic just as the maneuvers started. It was
DEAR JOHN 149
epic, with snow and sleet and hail and winds topping fi fty miles an
hour, making me think of Napoleon’s troops on the retreat from
Moscow. It was so cold that frost formed on my eyebrows, it hurt
to breathe, and my fi ngers would stick to the gun barrel if I touched
it accidentally. It stung like hell getting them unstuck, and I lost a
good bit of skin on the tips in the process. But I kept my face covered
and my hand on the stock after that and marched through icy
mud brought on by the endless snow showers, trying my best not
to become an ice statue while we pretended to fi ght the enemy.
We spent ten days doing that. Half my men got frostbite, the
other half suffered from hypothermia, and by the time we fi nished,
my squad was reduced to just three or four men, all of whom ended
up in the infi rmary once we got back to base. Including me. The
whole experience was just about the most ridiculous and idiotic
thing the army ever made me do. And that’s saying something,
because I’ve done a lot of idiotic things for good old Uncle Sam
and the Big Red One. At the end, our commander walked through
the ward, congratulating my squad on a job well done. I wanted to
tell him that maybe our time would have been better spent learning
modern war tactics or, at the very least, tuned in to the Weather
Channel. But instead I offered a salute and an acknowledgment,
being the good army grunt I am.
After that, I spent the next few uneventful months on base.
Sure, we did the occasional class on weapons or navigation, and
every now and then I’d wander into town for a beer with the guys,
but for the most part I lifted tons of weights, ran hundreds of miles,
and kicked Tony’s ass whenever we stepped into the boxing ring.
Spring in Germany wasn’t as bad as I thought it would be after
the disaster we went through on maneuvers. Snow melted, fl owers
came out, and the air began to warm. Well, not really warm, but
it rose above freezing, and that was enough for most of my buddies
and me to throw on shorts and play Frisbee or softball outside. As
June fi nally rolled around, I found myself getting antsy to return
to North Carolina. Savannah had graduated and was already in
150 Nicholas Sparks
summer school doing classes for her master’s degree, so I planned
to travel to Chapel Hill. We would have two glorious weeks together—
even when I went to see my dad in Wilmington, she
planned to come with me—and I found myself feeling alternately
nervous and excited and scared at the thought
Yes, we’d corresponded through the mail and talked on the
phone. Yes, I’d gone out to stare at the moon on the fi rst night it
was full, and in her letters she told me she had, too. But I hadn’t
seen her in nearly a year, and I didn’t have any idea how she’d react
when we were face-to-face again. Would she rush into my arms
when I got off the plane, or would her reaction be more restrained,
perhaps a gentle kiss on the cheek? Would we fall into easy conversation
immediately, or would we fi nd ourselves talking about the
weather and feeling awkward around each other? I didn’t know, and
I’d lie awake at night imagining a thousand different scenarios.
Tony knew what I was going through, though he knew better
than to call obvious attention to it. Instead, as the date approached,
he slapped me on the back.
“Gonna see her soon,” he said. “You ready for that?”
“Yeah.”
He smirked. “Don’t forget to pick up some tequila on the way
home.”
I made a face, and Tony laughed.
“It’s going to be just fi ne,” he said. “She loves you, man. She’s
got to, considering how much you love her.”
DEAR JOHN 151
In June 2001, I was given my leave and left for home
immediately, fl ying from Frankfurt to New York, then on to Raleigh.
It was a Friday evening, and Savannah had promised to pick
me up at the airport before bringing me to Lenoir to meet her
parents. She’d dropped that little surprise on me the day before
the fl ight. Now, I had nothing against meeting her parents, mind
you. I was sure they were wonderful people and all that, but if I
had my way, I would rather have had Savannah all to myself at
least for the fi rst few days. It’s kind of hard to make up for lost time
with the parents around. Even if we didn’t get physical—and
knowing Savannah, I was pretty sure we wouldn’t, though I kept
my fi ngers crossed—how would her parents treat me if I kept their
daughter out until the wee hours, even if all we did was lie under
the stars? Granted, she was an adult, but parents were funny when
it came to their own kids, and I was under no illusions that they’d
be understanding about the whole thing. She would always be
their little girl, if you know what I mean.
But Savannah had had a point when she explained it to me. I
had two weekends free, and if I planned to see my dad on the
second weekend, I had to see hers the fi rst weekend. Besides, she
sounded so excited about the whole thing that all I could say was
Thirteen
....Z....
that I was looking forward to meeting them. Still, I wondered if
I’d even be able to hold her hand, and I speculated about whether
I could talk her into taking a little detour on the way to Lenoir.
As soon as the plane landed, my anticipation grew and I could
feel my ticker booming. But I didn’t know how to act. Should I
jog toward her as soon as I spotted her or stroll casually, cool and
in control? I still wasn’t sure, but before I could dwell on it, I was
in the cattle chute, moving up the aisle. I slung my duffel bag over
my shoulder as I emerged from the ramp that accessed the terminal.
I didn’t see her at fi rst—too many folks milling around. When
I scanned the area a second time, I saw her off to the left and realized
instantly that all my worries had been pointless, for she spotted
me and came running at full tilt. I barely had time to drop my
duffel bag before she jumped into my arms, and the kiss that followed
was like its own magic kingdom, complete with its special
language and geography, fabulous myths and wonders for the ages.
And when she pulled back and whispered, “I missed you so much,”
I felt as if I’d been put back together after spending a year cut in
half.
I don’t know how long we stood together, but when we fi nally
began moving toward the baggage claim, I slipped my hand into
hers knowing that I loved her not only more than the last time I’d
seen her, but more than I would ever love anyone.
On the drive we talked easily, but we did make a small detour.
After pulling into a rest stop, we made out like teenagers. It was
great—let’s leave it at that—and a couple of hours later, we arrived
at her house. Her parents were waiting on the porch of a neat, twostory
Victorian. Surprising me, her mother hugged me as soon as I
got close, then offered me a beer. I declined, mostly because I knew
I’d be the only one drinking, but I appreciated the effort. Savannah’s
mom, Jill, was a lot like Savannah: friendly, open, and a lot
sharper than she fi rst came across. Her dad was exactly the same,
and I actually had a good time visiting with them. It didn’t hurt
that Savannah held my hand the whole time and seemed com-
DEAR JOHN 153
pletely at ease doing so. Toward the end of the evening, she and I
went for a long moonlit walk. By the time we got back to the
house, it felt almost as if we’d never been apart at all.
It went without saying that I slept in the guest room. I hadn’t
expected otherwise, and the room was a lot better than most places
I’d stayed, with classic furniture and a comfortable mattress. The air
was stuffy, though, and I opened the window, hoping the mountain
air would bring welcome cool. It had been a long day—I was still
on German time—and I fell asleep immediately, only to wake up
an hour later when I heard my door squeak open. Savannah, wearing
comfy cotton pajamas and socks, closed the door behind her and
started toward the bed, tiptoeing across the fl oor.
She held a fi nger to her lips to keep me quiet. “My parents would
kill me if they knew I was doing this,” she whispered. She crawled
into bed beside me and adjusted the covers, pulling them up to her
neck as if she were camping in the arctic. I put my arms around her,
loving the feel of her body against mine.
We kissed and giggled for most of the night, then she sneaked
back to her room. I fell asleep again, probably before she reached
her room, and awakened to the sight of sunlight streaming in the
window. The smell of breakfast came wafting into the room, and
I tossed on a T-shirt and jeans and went down to the kitchen.
Savannah was at the table, talking with her mom while her dad
read the paper, and I felt the weight of their presence when I entered.
I took a place at the table, and Savannah’s mom poured me
a cup of coffee before setting a plate of bacon and eggs in front of
me. Savannah, who was sitting across from me already showered
and dressed, was chipper and impossibly fresh-looking in the soft
morning light.
“Did you sleep okay?” she asked, her eyes shining with mischief.
I nodded. “Actually, I had the most wonderful dream,” I said.
“Oh?” her mom asked. “What was it about?”
I felt Savannah kick me under the table. She shook her head
almost imperceptibly. I have to admit that I enjoyed the sight of
154 Nicholas Sparks
Savannah squirming, but enough was enough. I feigned concentration.
“I can’t remember now,” I said.
“I hate when that happens,” her mother said. “Is breakfast
okay?”
“It smells great,” I said. “Thank you.” I glanced at Savannah.
“What’s on the agenda today?”
She leaned across the table. “I was thinking we might go horseback
riding. Do you think you’d be up for that?”
When I hesitated, she laughed. “You’ll be fi ne,” she added. “I
promise.”
“Easy for you to say.”
She rode Midas; for me, she suggested a quarter horse named Pepper,
which her dad usually rode. We spent most of the day walking
up trails, galloping through open fi elds, and exploring this part of
her world. She’d prepared a picnic lunch, and we ate at a spot that
overlooked Lenoir. She pointed out the schools she’d attended and
homes of the people she knew. It dawned on me then that not only
did she love it here, she never wanted to live anywhere else.
We spent six or seven hours in the saddle, and I did my best to
keep up with Savannah, though that was close to impossible. I
didn’t end up with my face planted in the dirt, but there were a
few dicey moments here and there when Pepper acted up and it
took everything I could do to hold on. It wasn’t until Savannah
and I were getting ready for dinner that I realized what I’d gotten
myself into, however. Little by little, I began to realize that my
walking resembled waddling. The inside muscles of my legs felt as
if Tony had pounded them for hours.
On Saturday night, Savannah and I went to dinner at a cozy
little Italian place. Afterward, she suggested we go dancing, but
by then I could barely move. As I limped toward the car, she adopted
a concerned expression and reached out to stop me.
Leaning over, she grasped my leg. “Does it hurt when I squeeze
right here?”
DEAR JOHN 155
I jumped and screamed. For some reason, she found this
amusing.
“Why’d you do that? That hurt!”
She smiled. “Just checking.”
“Checking what? I already told you—I’m sore.”
“I just wanted to see if little old me could make a big, tough
army guy like you scream.”
I rubbed my leg. “Yeah, well, let’s not test that anymore, okay?”
“Okay,” she said. “And I’m sorry.”
“You don’t sound sorry.”
“Well, I am,” she said. “But it is kind of funny, don’t you think?
I mean, I rode just as long as you, and I’m fi ne.”
“You ride all the time.”
“I haven’t ridden in over a month.”
“Yeah, well.”
“Come on. Admit it. It was kind of funny, wasn’t it?”
“Not at all.”
On Sunday, we attended church with her family. I was too sore to
do much else the rest of the day, so I plopped myself on the couch
and watched a baseball game with her dad. Savannah’s mom
brought in sandwiches, and I spent the afternoon wincing every
time I tried to get comfortable while the game went into extra
innings. Her dad was easy to talk to, and the conversation drifted
from army life to teaching to some of the kids he coached and his
hopes for their future. I liked him. From my seat, I could hear
Savannah and her mom chatting in the kitchen, and every now
and then, Savannah would come into the living room with a
basket of laundry to fold while her mother started another load in
the washing machine. Though technically a college graduate and
an adult, she still brought her dirty clothes home to Mom.
That night, we drove back to Chapel Hill, and Savannah showed
me her apartment. It was sparse in the furniture department, but it
was relatively new, and it had both a gas fi replace and small balcony
156 Nicholas Sparks
that offered a view of the campus. Despite the warm weather, she
got the fi re going, and we snacked on cheese and crackers, which,
aside from cereal, was about all she had to offer. It felt indescribably
romantic to me, though I’d come to realize that being alone
with Savannah always struck me as romantic. We talked until
nearly midnight, but Savannah was quieter than usual. In time,
she wandered to the bedroom. When she didn’t return, I went
to fi nd her. She was sitting on the bed, and I stopped in the
doorway.
She squeezed her hands together and drew a long breath.
“So . . . ,” she began.
“So . . . ,” I responded when she remained silent.
She drew another long breath. “It’s getting late. And I’ve got
an early class tomorrow.”
I nodded. “You should probably get some sleep.”
“Yeah,” she said. She nodded as if she hadn’t considered it and
turned toward the window. Through the blinds, I could see shafts
of light streaming in from the parking lot. She was cute when she
was nervous.
“So . . . ,” she said again, as if speaking to the wall.
I held up my hands. “Why don’t I sleep on the couch, okay?”
“You wouldn’t mind?”
“Not at all,” I said. Actually, it wasn’t what I preferred, but I
understood.
Still staring toward the window, she made no move to get up.
“I’m just not ready,” she said, her voice soft. “I mean, I thought I
was, and part of me really wants to. I’ve been thinking about it for
the last few weeks, and I made up my mind and it just seemed
right, you know? I love you and you love me, and this is what
people do when they’re in love. It was easy to tell myself when you
weren’t here, but now . . .” She trailed off.
“It’s okay,” I said.
At last she turned toward me. “Were you scared? Your fi rst
time?”
DEAR JOHN 157
I wondered how best to answer that. “I think it’s different for
men and women,” I said.
“Yeah. I suppose so.” She pretended to adjust the blankets. “Are
you mad?”
“Not at all.”
“But you’re disappointed.”
“Well . . . ,” I admitted, and she laughed.
“I’m sorry,” she said.
“There’s no reason to apologize.”
She thought about it. “Then why does it feel like I have to
apologize?”
“Well, I am a lonely soldier,” I pointed out, and she laughed
again. I could still hear the nervousness in it.
“The couch isn’t very comfortable,” she fretted. “And it’s small.
You won’t be able to stretch out. And I don’t have any extra blankets.
I should have grabbed a couple from home, but I forgot.”
“That is a problem.”
“Yeah,” she said. I waited.
“I suppose you could sleep with me,” she ventured.
I waited while she continued her own internal debate. Finally
she shrugged. “You want to give it a try? Just sleeping, I mean?”
“Whatever you say.”
For the fi rst time, her shoulders relaxed. “Okay, then. We’ve got
that settled. Just give me a minute to change.”
She rose from the bed, crossed the room, and opened a drawer.
The pajamas she chose were similar to the ones she’d worn at her
parents’, and I left her to go back to the living room, where I
slipped on some of my workout shorts and a T-shirt. By the time
I returned, she was already under the covers. I went to the other
side and crawled in beside her. She shuffl ed the covers before turning
out the light, then lay on her back, staring toward the ceiling.
I lay on my side, facing her.
“Good night,” she whispered.
“Good night.”
158 Nicholas Sparks
I knew I wouldn’t sleep. Not for a while, anyway. I was too . . .
worked up for that. But I didn’t want to toss and turn, in case she
could.
“Hey,” she fi nally whispered again.
“Yes?”
She rolled over to face me. “I just want you to know this is my
fi rst time that I’ve ever slept with a man. All night, I mean. That’s
a step closer, right?”
“Yeah,” I said. “It’s a step closer.”
She brushed my arm. “And now if anyone asks, you’ll be able
to tell them that we’ve slept together.”
“True,” I said.
“But you won’t tell anyone, will you? I mean, I don’t want to
get a reputation, you know.”
I stifl ed a laugh. “I’ll keep it our little secret.”
The next few days fell into an easy, relaxing pattern. Savannah had
classes in the morning and usually fi nished up a little after lunch.
Theoretically, I suppose it gave me the opportunity to sleep in—
something that all army recruits dream about when they talk about
going on leave—but years of rising before dawn was a habit impossible
to break. Instead, I woke before she did and would start a pot
of coffee before trotting down to the corner to pick up the newspaper.
Occasionally, I grabbed a couple of bagels or croissants;
other times, we simply had cereal at the house, and it was easy to
view our little routine as a preview of the fi rst years of our future
life together, effortless bliss that was almost too good to be true.
Or, at least, I tried to convince myself of that. When we stayed
with her parents, Savannah was exactly the girl I remembered.
Same thing on our fi rst night alone. But after that . . . I began to
notice differences. I guess I hadn’t fully realized that she was living
a life that seemed complete and fulfi lling, even without me. The
calendar she kept on the refrigerator door listed something to do
almost every day: concerts, lectures, half a dozen parties for various
DEAR JOHN 159
friends. Tim, I noted, was penciled in for the occasional lunch as
well. She was taking four classes and teaching another as a graduate
assistant, and on Thursday afternoons, she worked with a professor
on a case study, one she was sure would be published. Her life was
exactly the way she’d described it in her letters, and when she returned
to the apartment, she’d tell me about her day while she
made herself something to eat in the kitchen. She loved the work
she was doing, and the pride in her tone was evident. She would
talk animatedly while I listened, and I asked just enough questions
to keep the fl ow of conversation going.
Nothing unusual in that, I admitted. I knew enough to realize
that it would have been a bigger problem if she’d said nothing about
her day at all. But with every new story, I’d get this sinking feeling,
one that made me think that as much as we’d kept in touch, as
much as we cared about each other, she’d somehow zigged while I
had zagged. Since I’d last seen her, she’d completed her degree,
tossed her cap into the air at commencement, found work as a
graduate assistant, and moved into, and furnished, her own apartment.
Her life had entered a new phase, and while I suppose it was
possible to say the same thing about me, the simple fact was that
nothing much had changed on my end, unless you counted the fact
that I now knew how to assemble and disassemble eight types of
weapons instead of six and I’d increased my bench press by another
thirty pounds. And, of course, I’d done my part in giving the Russians
something to think about if they were debating whether or not
to invade Germany with dozens of mechanized divisions.
Don’t get me wrong. I was still head over heels for Savannah, and
there were times when I still sensed the strength of her feelings for
me. Lots of times, in fact. For the most part, it was a wonderful
week. While she was gone, I’d walk the campus or jog around the
sky blue track near the fi eld house, taking advantage of some much
needed downtime. Within a day I’d found a gym that would allow
me to work out for the time I was there, and because I was in the
service, they didn’t even charge me. I’d usually be fi nished working
160 Nicholas Sparks
out and showering by the time Savannah got back to the apartment,
and we’d spend the rest of the afternoon together. On Tuesday
night, we joined a group of her classmates for dinner in
downtown Chapel Hill. It was more fun than I’d thought it would
be, especially considering I was hanging out with a bunch of summer
school eggheads and most of the conversation centered on the
psychology of adolescents. On Wednesday afternoon, Savannah
gave me a tour of her classes and introduced me to her professors.
Later that afternoon, we met up with a couple of people I’d been
introduced to the night before. That evening, we picked up some
Chinese food and sat at the table in her apartment. She was wearing
one of those strappy tank tops that accentuated her tan, and all I
could think was that she was the sexiest woman I’d ever seen.
By Thursday, I wanted to spend some one-on-one time with her
and decided to surprise her with a special night out. While she was
in class and working on the case study, I went to the mall and
dropped a small fortune on a new suit and tie and another small
fortune on shoes. I wanted to see her dressed up, and I made dinner
reservations at this restaurant the shoe salesman had told me
was the best in town. Five stars, exotic menu, nattily dressed waiters,
the whole shebang. Granted, I didn’t tell Savannah about it
beforehand—it was supposed to be a surprise, after all—but as
soon as she walked in the door, I found out she’d already made
plans to spend another evening with the same friends we’d seen
during the last couple of days. She sounded so excited about it that
I never bothered to tell her what I’d planned.
Still, I wasn’t just disappointed, I was angry. To my way of thinking,
I was more than happy to spend an evening with her friends,
even an additional afternoon. But almost every day? After a year
apart, when we had so little time left together? It bothered me that
she didn’t seem to share the same desire. For the past few months,
I’d been imagining that we’d spend as much time together as we
could, making up for our year apart. But I was coming to the conclusion
that I might have been mistaken. Which meant . . . what?
DEAR JOHN 161
That I wasn’t as important to her as she was to me? I didn’t know,
but given my mood, I probably should have stayed at the apartment
and let her go by herself. Instead I sat off to the side, refused
to take part in the conversation, and pretty much stared down
everyone who looked my way. I’ve become good at intimidation
over the years, and I was in rare form that night. Savannah could
tell I was angry, but every time she asked if something was bothering
me, I was at my passive-aggressive best in denying that anything
was wrong at all.
“Just tired,” I said instead.
She tried to make things better, I’ll give her that. She reached
for my hand now and then, fl ashed a quick smile my way when she
thought I’d see it, and plied me with soda and chips. After a while,
though, she got tired of my attitude and pretty much gave up.
Not that I blame her. I’d made my point, and somehow the fact that
she started getting angry with me left me feeling fl ush with tit-fortat
satisfaction. We barely talked on the way home, and when we
got into bed, we slept on opposite sides of the mattress. In the morning
I was over it, ready to move on. Unfortunately, she wasn’t.
While I was out getting the paper, she left the apartment without
touching breakfast, and I ended up drinking my coffee alone.
I knew I’d gone too far, and I planned to make it up to her as soon
as she got home. I wanted to come clean about my concerns, tell
her about the dinner I’d planned, and apologize for my behavior. I
assumed she’d understand. We’d put it all behind us over a romantic
dinner out. It was just what I thought we needed, since we would
be leaving for Wilmington the next day to spend the weekend with
my dad.
Believe it or not, I wanted to see him, and I fi gured he was looking
forward to my visit, too, in his own way. Unlike Savannah, Dad
got a pass when it came to expectations. It might not have been
fair, but Savannah had a different role to play in my life then.
I shook my head. Savannah. Always Savannah. Everything
162 Nicholas Sparks
on this trip, everything about my life, I realized, always led back
to her.
By one o’clock, I’d fi nished working out, cleaned up, packed most
of my things, and called the restaurant to renew my reservation. I
knew Savannah’s schedule by then and assumed that she would
be rolling in any minute. With nothing else to do, I sat on the
couch and turned on the television. Game shows, soap operas,
infomercials, and talk shows were interspersed with commercials
from ambulance-chasing lawyers. Time dragged as I waited. I kept
wandering out on the patio to scan the parking lot for her car, and
I checked my gear three or four times. Savannah, I thought, was
surely on the way home, and I occupied myself with clearing out
the dishwasher. A few minutes later, I brushed my teeth for the
second time, then peeked out the window again. Still no Savannah.
I turned on the radio, listened to a few songs, and changed
the station six or seven times before turning it off. I walked to the
patio again. Nothing. By then, it was coming up on two o’clock.
I wondered where she was, felt the remnants of anger starting to
rise again, but forced them away. I told myself that she probably
had a legitimate explanation and repeated it again when it didn’t
take hold. I opened my bag and pulled out the latest from Stephen
King. I fi lled a glass with ice water, made myself comfortable on
the couch, but when I realized I was reading the same sentence
over and over, I put the book aside.
Another fi fteen minutes passed. Then thirty. By the time I heard
Savannah’s car pulling into the lot, my jaw was tight and I was
grinding my teeth. At a quarter past three, she pushed open the
door. She was all smiles, as if nothing were wrong.
“Hey, John,” she called out. She went to the table and started
unloading her backpack. “Sorry I was late, but after my class, a
student came up to tell me that she loved my class, and because of
me, she wanted to major in special education. Can you believe that?
DEAR JOHN 163
She wanted advice on what to do, what classes to take, what teachers
were the best . . . and the way she listened to my answers . . .”
Savannah shook her head. “It was . . . so rewarding. The way this
girl was hanging on everything I was saying . . . well, it just makes
me feel like I was really making a difference to someone. You hear
professors talk about experiences like that, but I never imagined
that it would happen to me.”
I forced a smile, and she took it as a cue to go on.
“Anyway, she asked if I had some time to really discuss it, and
even though I told her I only had a few minutes, one thing led to
another and we ended up going to lunch. She’s really something—
only seventeen, but she graduated a year early from high school.
She passed a bunch of AP exams, so she’s already a sophomore, and
she’s going to summer school so she can get even further ahead. You
have to admire her.”
She wanted an echo of her enthusiasm, but I couldn’t muster it.
“She sounds great,” I said instead.
At my answer, Savannah seemed to really look at me for the
fi rst time, and I made no effort to hide my feelings.
“What’s wrong?” she asked.
“Nothing,” I lied.
She set her backpack aside with a disgusted sigh. “You don’t
want to talk about it? Fine. But you should know that it’s getting
a little tiring.”
“What’s that supposed to mean?”
She whirled toward me. “This! The way you’re acting,” she
said. “You’re not that hard to read, John. You’re angry, but you
don’t want to tell me why.”
I hesitated, feeling defensive. When I fi nally spoke, I forced
myself to keep my voice steady. “Okay,” I said, “I thought you’d be
home hours ago. . . .”
She threw up her hands. “That’s what this is about? I explained
that. Believe it or not, I have responsibilities now. And if I’m not
164 Nicholas Sparks
mistaken, I apologized for being late as soon as I walked in the
door.”
“I know, but . . .”
“But what? My apology wasn’t good enough?”
“I didn’t say that.”
“Then what is it?”
When I couldn’t fi nd the words, she put her hands on her hips.
“You want to know what I think? You’re still mad about last night.
But let me guess—you don’t want to talk about that either, right?”
I closed my eyes. “Last night, you—”
“Me?” she broke in, and began shaking her head. “Oh no—
don’t blame me for this! I didn’t do anything wrong. I wasn’t the
one who started this! Last night could have been fun—would
have been fun—but you had to sit around acting as if you wanted
to shoot someone.”
She was exaggerating. Or then again, maybe she wasn’t. Either
way, I kept quiet.
She went on. “Do you know that I had to make excuses for you
today? And how that made me feel? Here I was, singing your
praises all year long, telling my friends what a nice guy you were,
how mature you were, how proud I am of the job you’re doing.
And they ended up seeing a side of you that even I’ve never seen
before. You were just . . . rude.”
“Did you ever think that I might have been acting that way
because I didn’t want to be there?”
That stopped her, but only for an instant. She crossed her
arms. “Maybe the way you acted last night was the reason I was
late today.”
Her statement caught me off guard. I hadn’t considered that,
but that wasn’t the point.
“I’m sorry about last night—”
“You should be!” she cried, cutting me off again. “Those are my
friends!”
DEAR JOHN 165
“I know they’re your friends!” I snapped, pushing myself up
from the couch. “We’ve been with them all week!”
“What’s that supposed to mean?”
“Just what I said. Maybe I wanted to be alone with you. Did you
ever think of that?”
“You want to be alone with me?” she demanded. “Well, let me
tell you, you’re sure not acting like it. We were alone this morning.
We were alone when I walked in the door just now. We were
alone when I tried to be nice and put this all behind us, but all
you wanted to do is fi ght.”
“I don’t want to fi ght!” I said, doing my best not to shout but
knowing I’d failed. I turned away, trying to keep my anger in
check, but when I spoke again, I could hear the ominous undercurrent
in my voice. “I just want things to be like they were. Like
last summer.”
“What about last summer?”
I hated this. I didn’t want to tell her that I no longer felt important.
What I wanted was akin to asking someone to love you,
and that never worked. Instead, I tried to dance around the
subject.
“Last summer, it just felt like we had more time together.”
“No, we didn’t,” she countered. “I worked on houses all day
long. Remember?”
She was right, of course. At least partially. I tried again. “I’m
not saying it makes much sense, but it seems like we had more
time to talk last year.”
“And that’s what’s bothering you? That I’m busy? That I have
a life? What do you want me to do? Ditch my classes all week? Call
in sick when I have to teach? Skip my homework?”
“No . . .”
“Then what do you want?”
“I don’t know.”
“But you’re willing to humiliate me in front of my friends?”
166 Nicholas Sparks
“I didn’t humiliate you,” I protested.
“No? Then why did Tricia pull me aside today? Why did she
feel the need to tell me that we had nothing in common and that
I could do a lot better?”
That stung, but I’m not sure she realized how it came across.
Anger sometimes makes that impossible, as I was well aware.
“I just wanted to be alone with you last night. That’s all I’m trying
to say.”
My words had no effect on her.
“Then why didn’t you tell me that?” she demanded instead.
“Say something like ‘Would it be okay if we do something
else? I’m not really in the mood to hang out with people.’
That’s all you would have had to say. I’m not a mind reader,
John.”
I opened my mouth to answer but said nothing. Instead, I
turned away and walked to the other side of the room. I stared out
the patio door, not angered so much by what she’d said, just . . .
sad. It struck me that I had somehow lost her, and I didn’t know
whether it was because I’d been making too much of nothing or
because I understood all too well what was really happening between
us.
I didn’t want to talk about it anymore. I was never good at talking,
and I realized that what I really wanted was for her to cross
the room and put her arms around me, to say that she understood
what was really bothering me and that I had nothing to worry
about.
But none of those things happened. Instead I spoke to the
window, feeling strangely alone. “You’re right,” I said. “I should
have told you. And I’m sorry about that. And I’m sorry about the
way I acted last night, and I’m sorry about being upset that you
were late. It’s just that I really wanted to see you as much as I
could this trip.”
“You say that like you don’t think I want the same thing.”
DEAR JOHN 167
I turned around. “To be honest,” I said, “I’m not sure you do.”
With that, I headed for the door.
I was gone until nightfall.
I didn’t know where to go or even why I left, other than that I
needed to be alone. I started for campus beneath a sweltering sun
and found myself moving from one shade tree to the next. I didn’t
check to see if she was following; I knew that she wouldn’t be.
In time, I stopped and bought an ice water at the student center,
but even though it was relatively empty and the cool air refreshing,
I didn’t stay. I felt the need to sweat, as if to purify myself from the
anger and sadness and disappointment I couldn’t shake.
One thing was certain: Savannah had walked in the door ready
for an argument. Her answers had come too quickly, and I realized
that they seemed less spontaneous than rehearsed, as if her own
anger had been simmering most of the day. She’d known exactly
how I would be acting, and though I might have deserved her
anger based on the way I’d acted last night, the fact that she hadn’t
appeared to care about her own culpability or my feelings gnawed
at me for most of the afternoon.
Shadows lengthened as the sun began to go down, but I still
wasn’t ready to go back. Instead, I bought a couple of slices of pizza
and a beer from one of those tiny storefront places that depended
on students to survive. I fi nished eating, walked some more, and
fi nally began the trek back to her apartment. By then it was nearly
nine, and the emotional roller coaster I’d been on left me feeling
drained. Approaching the street, I noticed Savannah’s car was still
in the same spot. I could see a lamp blazing from inside the bedroom.
The rest of the apartment was black.
I wondered whether the door would be locked, but the knob
turned freely when I tried. The bedroom door was halfway closed,
light spilled down the hallway, and I debated whether to approach
or stay in the living room. I didn’t want to face her anger, but I
took a deep breath and made my way down the short hallway. I
168 Nicholas Sparks
poked my head in. She was sitting on the bed in an oversize shirt,
one that reached to midthigh. She looked up from a magazine,
and I offered a tentative smile.
“Hey,” I said.
“Hey.”
I crossed the room and sat on the edge of bed.
“I’m sorry,” I said. “For everything. You were right. I was a jerk
last night, and I shouldn’t have embarrassed you in front of your
friends. And I shouldn’t have been so angry that you were late. It
won’t happen again.”
She surprised me by patting the mattress. “Come here,” she
whispered.
I moved up the bed, leaned against the bed frame, and slipped
my arm around her. She leaned against me, and I could feel the
steady rise and fall of her chest.
“I don’t want to argue anymore,” she said.
“I don’t either.”
When I stroked her arm, she sighed. “Where’d you go?”
“Nowhere, really,” I said. “Just walked the campus. Had some
pizza. Did a lot of thinking.”
“About me?”
“About you. About me. About us.”
She nodded. “Me too,” she said. “Are you still mad?”
“No,” I said. “I was, but I’m too tired to be mad anymore.”
“Me too,” she repeated. She lifted her head to face me. “I want
to tell you something about what I was thinking while you were
gone,” she said. “Can I do that?”
“Of course,” I said.
“I realized that I’m the one who should have been apologizing.
About spending so much time with my friends, I mean. I think
that’s why I got so mad earlier. I knew what you were trying to say,
but I didn’t want to hear it because I knew you were right. Partly,
anyway. But your reasoning was wrong.”
I looked at her uncertainly. She went on.
DEAR JOHN 169
“You think that I made you spend so much time with my friends
because you weren’t as important to me as you used to be, right?”
She didn’t wait for an answer. “But that’s not the reason. It’s really
the opposite. I was doing that because you’re so important to me.
Not so much because I wanted you to get to know my friends, or
so they could get to know you, but because of me.”
She halted uncertainly.
“I don’t know what you’re trying to say.”
“Do you remember when I told you that I draw strength from
being with you?”
When I nodded, she skated her fi ngers along my chest. “I wasn’t
kidding about that. Last summer meant so much to me. More than
you can ever imagine, and when you left, I was a wreck. Ask Tim.
I barely worked on the houses. I know I sent you letters that made
you think all was well and good, but it wasn’t. I cried every night,
and every day I’d sit at the house and keep imagining and hoping
and wishing that you’d come strolling up the beach. Every time I
saw someone with a crew cut, I’d feel my heart start beating faster,
even though I knew it wasn’t you. But that was the thing. I wanted
it to be you. Every time. I know that what you do is important, and
I understand that you’re posted overseas, but I don’t think I understood
how hard it was going to be once you weren’t around. It
seemed like it was almost killing me, and it took a long time to
even begin to feel normal again. And on this trip, as much as I
wanted to see you, as much as I love you, there’s this part of me
that’s terrifi ed that I’m going to go to pieces again when our time
is up. I’m being pulled in two directions, and my response was to
do anything I could so I wouldn’t have to go through what I did
last year again. So I tried to keep us busy, you know? To keep my
heart from being broken again.”
I felt my throat tighten but said nothing. In time, she went on.
“Today, I realized that I was hurting you in the process. That
wasn’t fair to you, but at the same time, I’m trying to be fair to me,
too. In a week, you’ll be gone again, and I’m the one who’s going
170 Nicholas Sparks
to have to fi gure out how to function afterwards. Some people can
do that. You can do that. But for me . . .”
She stared at her hands, and for a long time it was quiet.
“I don’t know what to say,” I fi nally admitted.
Despite herself, she laughed. “I don’t want an answer,” she said,
“because I don’t think there is one. But I do know that I don’t
want to hurt you. That’s all I know. I just hope I can fi nd a way to
be stronger this summer.”
“We could always work out together,” I joked halfheartedly, and
was gratifi ed to hear the sound of her laugh.
“Yeah, that’ll work. Ten chin-ups and I’ll be good as new, right?
I wish it were that easy. But I’ll make it. It might not be easy, but
at least it’s not going to be a full year this time. That’s what I kept
reminding myself today. That you’ll be home for Christmas. A few
more months and all this will be over.”
I held her then, feeling the warmth of her body against my own.
I could feel her fi ngers through the thin fabric of my shirt and felt
her tug gently, exposing the skin of my stomach. The sensation
was electric. I savored her touch and leaned in to kiss her.
There was a different kind of passion to her kiss, something vibrant
and alive. I felt her tongue against my own, conscious of the
way her body was responding, and breathed deeply as her fi ngers
began to drift toward the snap on my jeans. When I slid my hands
lower, I realized that she was naked beneath the shirt. She undid
the snap, and though I wanted nothing more than to continue, I
forced myself to pull back, to stop before this went too far, to prevent
something I still wasn’t sure she was ready for.
I sensed my own hesitation, but before I could dwell on it, she
suddenly sat up and slipped off her shirt. My breaths quickened as I
stared at her, and all at once, she leaned forward and lifted my shirt.
She kissed my navel and my ribs, then my chest, and I could feel
her hands begin to tug at my jeans.
I stood up from the bed and pulled off my shirt, then let my
jeans fall to the fl oor. I kissed her neck and shoulders and felt the
DEAR JOHN 171
172 Nicholas Sparks
warmth of her breath in my ear. The sensation of her skin against
mine was like fi re, and we began to make love.
It was everything I had dreamed it would be, and when we were
fi nished, I wrapped my arms around Savannah, trying to record the
memory of every sensation. In the dark, I whispered to her how
much I loved her.
We made love a second time, and when Savannah fi nally fell
asleep, I found myself staring at her. Everything about her was exquisitely
peaceful, but for some reason, I couldn’t escape a nagging
sense of dread. As tender and exciting as it had been, I couldn’t help
wondering whether there had been a trace of desperation in our
actions, as if we were both clinging to the hope that this would
sustain our relationship through whatever the future would bring.
O
ur remaining time together on my leave was much as I had originally hoped. Aside from the weekend with my father—
during which he cooked for us and spoke endlessly about coins—
we were alone as much as possible. Back in Chapel Hill, once
Savannah was fi nished with her classes for the day, our afternoons
and evenings were spent together. We walked through the stores
along Franklin Street, went to the North Carolina Museum of
History in Raleigh, and even spent a couple of hours at the North
Carolina Zoo. On my second to last evening in town, we went to
dinner at the fancy restaurant the shoe salesman had told me
about. She wouldn’t let me peek while she was getting ready, but
when she fi nally emerged from the bathroom, she was positively
glamorous. I stared at her in between bites, thinking how lucky I
was to be with her.
We didn’t make love again. After our night together, I woke
the next morning to fi nd Savannah studying me, tears running
down her cheeks. Before I could ask what was wrong, she put a
fi nger to my lips and shook her head, willing me not to speak.
“Last night was wonderful,” she said, “but I don’t want to talk
about it.” Instead, she wrapped herself around me and I held her
for a long time, listening to the sound of her breath. I knew then
Fourteen
....Z....
174 Nicholas Sparks
that something had changed between us, but at the time, I didn’t
have the courage to fi nd out what.
On the morning I left, Savannah drove me to the airport. We sat
at the gate together, waiting for my fl ight to be called, her thumb
tracing small circles on the back of my hand. When it was time for
me to board the plane, she fell into my arms and started to cry.
When she saw my expression, she forced a laugh, but I could hear
the sorrow in it.
“I know I promised,” she said, “but I can’t help it.”
“It’s going to be okay,” I said. “It’s only six months. With all
that’s going on in your life, you’ll be amazed how fast that goes.”
“Easy to say,” she said, sniffl ing. “But you’re right. I’m going to
be stronger this time. I’ll be okay.”
I scrutinized her face for signs of denial but saw none.
“Really,” she said. “I’ll be fi ne.”
I nodded, and for a long moment we simply stared at each
other.
“Will you remember to watch for the full moon?” she asked.
“Every single time,” I promised.
We shared one last kiss. I held her tight and whispered that I
loved her, then I forced myself to release her. I slung my gear over
my shoulder and headed up the ramp. Peeking over my shoulder,
I realized that Savannah was already gone, hidden somewhere in
the crowd.
On the plane, I leaned back in the seat, praying that Savannah
had been telling the truth. Though I knew she loved and cared for
me, I suddenly understood that even love and caring weren’t always
enough. They were the concrete bricks of our relationship, but
unstable without the mortar of time spent together, time without
the threat of imminent separation hanging over us. Although I
didn’t want to admit it, there was much about her I didn’t know. I
hadn’t realized how my leaving last year had affected her, and despite
anxious hours thinking about it, I wasn’t sure how it would
DEAR JOHN 175
affect her now. Our relationship, I felt with a heaviness in my chest,
was beginning to feel like the spinning movement of a child’s top.
When we were together, we had the power to keep it spinning, and
the result was beauty and magic and an almost childlike sense of
wonder; when we separated, the spinning began inevitably to slow.
We became wobbly and unstable, and I knew I had to fi nd a way to
keep us from toppling over.
I’d learned my lesson from the year before. Not only did I write
more letters from Germany during July and August, but I called
Savannah more frequently as well. I listened carefully during the
calls, trying to pick up any signs of depression and longing to hear
any words of affection or desire. In the beginning, I was nervous
before making those calls; by the end of the summer, I was waiting
for them. Her classes went well. She spent a couple of weeks with
her parents, then began the fall semester. In the fi rst week of September,
we began the countdown of days I had left until my discharge.
There were one hundred to go. It was easier to talk of days
rather than weeks or months; somehow it made the distance between
us shrink to something far more intimate, something that
both of us knew we could handle. The hard part was behind us,
we reminded each other, and I found that as I fl ipped the days on
the calendar, the worries I’d had about our relationship began to
diminish. I was certain there was nothing in the world that could
stop us from being together.
Then came September 11.
T
his I am sure of: The images of September 11 will be with me forever. I watched the smoke billowing from the Twin
Towers and the Pentagon and saw the grim faces of the men
around me as they watched people jump to their deaths. I witnessed
the buildings’ collapse and the massive cloud of dust and
debris that rose in their place. I felt fury as the White House was
evacuated.
Within hours, I knew that the United States would respond
to the attack and that the armed services would lead the way.
The base was put on high alert, and I doubted there was ever a
time that I was prouder of my men. In the days that followed, it
was as if all personal differences and political affi liations of any
kind melted away. For a short period of time, we were all simply
Americans.
Recruiting offi ces began to fi ll around the country with men
wanting to enlist. Among those of us already enlisted, the desire
to serve was stronger than ever. Tony was the fi rst of the men in
my squad to reup for an additional two years, and one by one,
every other man followed his lead. Even I, who was expecting my
honorable discharge in December and had been counting the days
Fifteen
....Z....
DEAR JOHN 177
until I could go home to Savannah, caught the fever and found
myself reenlisting.
It would be easy to say that I was infl uenced by what was going
on around me and that was the reason I made the decision I did.
But that’s just an excuse. Granted, I was caught up in the same
patriotic wave, but more than that, I was bound by the twin ties
of friendship and responsibility. I knew my men, I cared about
my men, and the thought of abandoning them at a time like this
struck me as impossibly cowardly. We’d been through too much
together for me to even contemplate leaving the service in those
waning days of 2001.
I called Savannah with the news. Initially, she was supportive.
Like everyone else, she’d been horrifi ed by what had happened,
and she understood the sense of duty that weighed on me, even
before I tried to explain it. She said she was proud of me.
But reality soon set in. In choosing to serve my country, I’d made
a sacrifi ce. Though the investigation into the perpetrators was completed
quickly, 2001 drifted to an uneventful close for us. Our infantry
division played no role in the overthrow of the Taliban
government in Afghanistan, a disappointment to everyone in my
squad. Instead, we spent most of winter and spring drilling and
preparing for what everyone knew was the future invasion of Iraq.
It was, I suppose, around this time that the letters from Savannah
began to change. Where once they came weekly, they
started arriving every ten days, and then, as the days began to
lengthen, they came only every other week. I tried to console
myself with the fact that the tone of the letters hadn’t changed,
but in time even that did. Gone were long passages in which she
described the way she envisioned our life together, passages that
in the past had always fi lled me with anticipation. We both knew
that dream was now two years distant. Writing about a future so
far off reminded her of how long we had to go, something painful
for both of us to contemplate.
178 Nicholas Sparks
As May swept in, I consoled myself that at least we would be
able to see each other on my next leave. Fate, however, conspired
against us again just a few days before I was to return home. My
commanding offi cer requested a meeting, and when I presented
myself in the offi ce, he instructed me to take a seat. My dad, he told
me, had just suffered a major heart attack, and he’d already gone
ahead and granted the additional emergency leave. Instead of heading
to Chapel Hill and two glorious weeks with Savannah, I traveled
to Wilmington and spent my days by my dad’s bedside,
breathing in the antiseptic odor that always made me think less of
healing than of death itself. When I arrived, my dad was in the
intensive care unit; he stayed there most of my leave. His skin had
a grayish pallor, and his breathing was rapid and weak. For the fi rst
week, he drifted in and out of consciousness, but when he was
awake, I saw emotions in my father that I’d seen only rarely and
never in combination: desperate fear, momentary confusion, and a
heartbreaking gratitude that I was beside him. More than once, I
reached for his hand, another fi rst in my life. Because of a tube inserted
into his throat, he couldn’t speak, so I did all the talking for
us. Though I told him a little of what was going on back on base, I
spoke to him mainly about coins. I read him the Greysheet; when
that was done, I went to his house and retrieved the old copies he
kept fi led in his drawer and read those to him as well. I researched
coins on the Internet—at sites like David Hall Rare Coins and
Legend Numismatics—and recited what was being offered as well
as the latest prices. The prices amazed me and I suspected that my
father’s collection, despite the fall in coin prices since gold was
in its heyday, was probably ten times as valuable as the house
he’d owned outright for years. My father, unable to master the art
of even simple conversation, had become richer than anyone I
knew.
My dad was uninterested in their value. His eyes would dart
away whenever I mentioned it, and I soon remembered what I’d
somehow forgotten: that to my dad, the pursuit of the coins was
DEAR JOHN 179
far more interesting than the coins themselves, and to him each
coin was representative of a story with a happy ending. With that
in mind, I racked my brain, doing my best to remember those
coins that we had found together. Because my dad kept exceptional
records, I would scan those before going to sleep, and little
by little, those memories came back. The following day, I would
recall for him stories of our trips to Raleigh or Charlotte or Savannah.
Despite the fact that even the doctors weren’t sure whether
he was going to make it, my dad smiled more in those weeks than
I ever remember him doing. He made it back home the day before
I was set to leave, and the hospital made arrangements for someone
to look in on him while he continued to recover.
But if my stay in the hospital strengthened my relationship with
my dad, it did nothing for my relationship with Savannah. Don’t
get me wrong—she joined me as often as she could, and she was
both supportive and sympathetic. But because I spent so much time
in the hospital, it did little to heal the fi ssures that had begun to
form in our relationship. To be honest, I wasn’t sure what I even
wanted from her: When she was there, I felt as if I wanted to be
alone with my dad, but when she wasn’t, I wanted her by my side.
Somehow, Savannah navigated this minefi eld without reacting to
any stress I redirected her way. She seemed to know what I was
thinking and anticipate what I wanted, even better than I did.
Still, what we needed was time together. Time alone. If our relationship
was a battery, my time overseas was continually draining
it, and we both needed time to recharge. Once, while sitting with
my dad and listening to the steady beep of the heart monitor, I
realized that Savannah and I had spent only 4 of the last 104 weeks
together. Less than 5 percent. Even with letters and phone calls, I
would sometimes fi nd myself staring into space, wondering how
we’d survived as long as we had.
We did make it out for occasional walks, and we dined together
twice. But because Savannah was teaching and taking classes
again, it was impossible for her to stay. I tried not to blame her for
180 Nicholas Sparks
that, except when I did, and we ended up arguing. I hated that, as
did she, but neither of us seemed to be able to stop it. And though
she said nothing, and even denied it when confronted, I knew the
underlying issue was the fact that I was supposed to be home for
good and wasn’t. It was the fi rst and only time that Savannah ever
lied to me.
We put the argument behind us as best we could, and good-bye
was another tearful affair, though less so than the last time. It would
be comforting to think that it was because we were getting used to
it, or that we were both growing up, but as I sat on the plane, I knew
that something irrevocable had changed between us. Fewer tears
had been shed because the intensity of the feeling between us had
waned.
It was a painful realization, and on the night of the next full
moon, I found myself wandering out onto the deserted soccer fi eld.
And just as I’d promised, I remembered my time with Savannah
on my fi rst leave. I thought my of second leave as well, but
strangely, I didn’t want to think about the third leave, for even
then I think I knew what it portended.
As the summer wore on, my dad continued to improve, albeit
slowly. In his letters, he wrote that he’d taken to walking around
the block three times a day, every day, each journey lasting exactly
twenty minutes, but even that was hard on him. If there was a
positive side to all this, it was that it gave him something to build
his days around now that he was retired—something aside from
coins, that is. In addition to sending letters even more frequently,
I began to phone him on Tuesdays and Fridays at exactly one
o’clock his time, just to make sure he was okay. I listened for any
signs of fatigue in his voice and reminded him constantly about
eating well, sleeping enough, and taking his medication. I always
did most of the talking. Dad found phone conversations even
more painful than face-to-face communication and always sounded
as if he wanted nothing more than to hang up the phone as
quickly as he could. In time, I took to teasing him about this, but
DEAR JOHN 181
I was never sure if he knew I was kidding. This amused me, and I
sometimes laughed; though he didn’t laugh in response, his tone
would immediately lighten, if only temporarily, before he lapsed
back into silence. That was okay. I knew he looked forward to the
calls. He always answered on the fi rst ring, and I had no trouble
imagining him staring at the clock and waiting for the call.
August turned to September, then October. Savannah fi nished
her classes at Chapel Hill and moved back home while she began
hunting for a job. In the newspapers, I read about the United Nations
and how European countries wanted to fi nd a way to keep us
from going to war with Iraq. Things were tense in the capitals of our
NATO allies; on the news, there were demonstrations from the
citizens and forceful proclamations from their leaders that the
United States was about to make a terrible mistake. Meanwhile, our
leaders tried to change their minds. I and everyone in my squad just
kept going about our business, training for the inevitable with grim
determination. Then, in November, my squad and I went back to
Kosovo again. We weren’t there long, but it was more than
enough. I was tired of the Balkans by then, and I was tired of
peacekeeping, too. More important, I and everyone else in the
service knew that war in the Middle East was coming, whether
Europe wanted it or not.
During that time, the letters from Savannah still came somewhat
regularly, as did my phone calls to her. Usually I’d call her
before dawn, as I always had—it was around midnight her time—
and though I’d always been able to reach her in the past, more than
once she wasn’t home. Though I tried to convince myself she was
out with friends or her parents, it was diffi cult to keep my thoughts
from running wild. After hanging up the phone, I sometimes found
myself imagining that she’d met another man she cared about.
Sometimes I would call two or three more times in the next hour,
growing angrier with every ring that went unanswered.
When she would fi nally answer, I could have asked her where
she’d been, but I never did. Nor did she always volunteer the infor-
182 Nicholas Sparks
mation. I know I made a mistake in keeping quiet, simply because
I found it impossible to banish the question from my mind, even
as I tried to focus on the conversation at hand. More often than not,
I was tense on the phone, and her responses were tense as well. Too
often our conversations were less a joyous exchange of affection
than a rudimentary exchange of information. After hanging up, I
always hated myself for the jealousy I’d been feeling, and I’d beat
myself up for the next couple of days, promising that I wouldn’t let
it happen again.
Other times, however, Savannah came across as exactly the same
person I remembered, and I could tell how much she still cared for
me. Throughout it all, I loved her as much as I always had, and I
found myself aching for those simpler times in the past. I knew what
was happening, of course. As we were drifting apart, I was becoming
more desperate to save what we once had shared; like a vicious
circle, however, my desperation made us drift apart even further.
We began to have arguments. As with the argument we had in
her apartment on my second leave, I had trouble telling her what
I was feeling, and no matter what she said, I couldn’t escape the
thought that I was being baited by her or that she wasn’t even
attempting to alleviate my concerns. I hated these calls even
worse than I hated my jealousy, even though I knew the two were
intertwined.
Despite our troubles, I never doubted that we would make it. I
wanted a life with Savannah more than I ever wanted anything.
In December, I began calling more regularly and did my best to
keep my jealousy in check. I forced myself to be upbeat on the
phone, in the hope that she would want to hear from me. I thought
things were getting better, and on the surface they were, but four
days before Christmas, I reminded her that I’d be home in a little
less than a year. Instead of the excited response I expected, she
grew quiet. All I could hear was the sound of her breathing.
“Did you hear me?” I asked.
DEAR JOHN 183
“Yeah,” she said, her tone soft. “It’s just that I’ve heard that
before.”
It was the truth, and we both knew it, but I didn’t sleep well for
nearly a week.
The full moon fell on New Year’s Day, and though I went out to
stare at it and remembered the week when we fell in love, those
images were fuzzy, as if blurred by the overwhelming sadness I felt
inside. On the walk back, dozens of men were clustered in circles
or leaning against buildings while smoking cigarettes, as though
they had no cares at all. I wondered what they thought when they
saw me walking by. Did they sense that I was losing all that mattered
to me? Or that I wished again that I could change the past?
I don’t know, and they didn’t ask. The world was changing fast.
The orders we’d been waiting for were given the following morning,
and a few days later, my squad found itself in Turkey as we began
preparing to invade Iraq from the north. We sat in meetings where
we learned our assignments, studied the topography, and went over
battle plans. There was little free time, but when we did venture
outside of camp, it was hard to ignore the hostile glares of the
populace. We heard rumors that Turkey was planning to deny access
to our troops for use in the invasion and that talks were under way
to make sure they wouldn’t. We’d long ago learned to listen to rumors
with a grain of salt, but this time the rumors were accurate,
and my squad and others were sent to Kuwait to start all over.
We landed in midafternoon under a cloudless sky and found
ourselves surrounded by sand on every side. Almost immediately
we were loaded on a bus, drove for hours, and ended up in what
was essentially the largest tent city I’d ever seen. The army did its
best to make it comfortable. The food was good and the PX had
everything you might need, but it was boring. Mail delivery was
poor—I received no letters at all—and the lines for the phone
were always a mile long. In between drills, my men and I either
sat around trying to guess when the invasion would start or prac-
184 Nicholas Sparks
ticed getting into our chemical suits as quickly as we could. The
plan was for my squad to augment other units from different divisions
on a hard push to Baghdad. By February, after what already
felt like a zillion years in the desert, my squad and I were as ready
as we’d ever be.
At that point, a lot of soldiers had been in Kuwait since mid-
November, and the rumor mill was in full swing. No one knew what
was coming. I heard about biological and chemical weapons; I heard
that Saddam had learned his lesson in Desert Storm and was retrenching
the Republican Guard around Baghdad, in the hope of
making a bloody last stand. On March 17, I knew there would be
war. On my last night in Kuwait, I wrote letters to those I loved, in
case I didn’t make it: one to my father and one to Savannah. That
evening, I found myself part of a convoy that stretched a hundred
miles into Iraq.
Fighting was sporadic, at least initially. Because our air force
dominated the skies, we had little to fear overhead as we rolled up
mainly deserted highways. The Iraqi army, for the most part, was
nowhere to be seen, which only increased the tension I felt as I
tried to anticipate what my squad would face later in the campaign.
Here and there, we’d get word of enemy mortar fi re, and
we’d scramble into our suits, only to learn it was a false alarm.
Soldiers were tense. I didn’t sleep for three days.
Deeper in Iraq, skirmishes began to break out, and it was then I
learned the fi rst law associated with Operation Iraqi Freedom: Civilians
and enemies often looked exactly alike. Shots would ring
out, we’d attack, and there were times we weren’t even sure who we
were shooting at. As we reached the Sunni Triangle, the war began
to intensify. We heard about battles in Fallujah, Ramadi, and Tikrit,
all being fought by other units in other divisions. My squad joined
the Eighty-second Airborne in an assault on Samawah, and it was
there that my squad and I had our fi rst taste of real combat.
The air force had paved the way. Bombs, missiles, and mortars
had been exploding since the day before, and as we crossed the
DEAR JOHN 185
bridge into the city, my fi rst thought was amazement at the stillness.
My squad was assigned to an outlying neighborhood, where we were
to move from house to house to help clear the area of the enemy.
As we moved, images came quickly: the charred remains of a truck,
the driver’s lifeless body beside it; a partially demolished building;
ruins of cars smoking here and there. Sporadic rifl e fi re kept us on
edge. As we patrolled, civilians occasionally rushed out with their
arms up, and we tried our best to save the wounded.
By early afternoon, we were getting ready to head back, but we
were assaulted by heavy fi re coming from a building up the street.
Pinned against a wall, we were in a precarious position. Two men
covered while I led the rest of my squad through the shooting gallery
to a safer spot on the other side of the street; it struck me as
almost miraculous that no one was killed. From there, we sank a
thousand rounds into the enemy’s position, laying absolute waste to
it. When I thought it was safe, we began our approach to the building,
moving cautiously. I used a grenade to blast open the front door.
I led my men to the door and poked my head in. Smoke was heavy,
and sulfur hung in the air. The interior was destroyed, but at least
one Iraqi soldier had survived, and as soon as we were close, he
began shooting from the crawl space beneath the fl oor. Tony got
clipped in the hand, and the rest of us responded with hundreds of
rounds. The sound was so loud that I couldn’t hear myself screaming,
but I kept my fi nger squeezed, aiming everywhere from the fl oor
to the walls to the ceiling. Chips of plaster and brick and wood were
fl ying as the interior was decimated. When we fi nally stopped fi ring,
I was sure that no one could have survived, but I threw another
grenade into an opening that led to the crawl space just to make
sure, and we braced outside for the explosion.
After twenty minutes of the most intense experience of my life,
the street was quiet, except for the ringing in my ears and the sounds
of my men as they puked or cussed or rehashed the experience. I
wrapped Tony’s hand, and when I thought everyone was ready, we
began backing out the way we’d come. In time, we made our way to
186 Nicholas Sparks
the railroad station, which our troops had secured, and we collapsed.
That night, we received our fi rst batch of mail in almost six
weeks.
In the mail, there were six letters from my father. But from Savannah
there was only one, and in the dim light, I began to read.
Dear John,
I’m writing this letter at the kitchen table, and I’m struggling
because I don’t know how to say what I’m about to tell you. Part
of me wishes that you were here with me so I could do this in
person, but we both know that’s impossible. So here I am, groping
for words with tears on my cheeks and hoping that you’ll somehow
forgive me for what I’m about to write.
I know this is a terrible time for you. I try not to think about
the war, but I can’t escape the images, and I’m scared all the time.
I watch the news and scour newspapers, knowing you’re in the
midst of all of it, trying to fi nd out where you are and what you’re
going through. I pray every night that you’ll make it home safely,
and I always will. You and I shared something wonderful, and I
never want you to forget that. Nor do I want you to believe that
you didn’t mean as much to me as I did to you. You’re rare and
beautiful, John. I fell in love with you, but more than that, meeting
you made me realize what true love really means. For the past
two and a half years, I’ve been staring at every full moon and
remembering everything we’ve been through together. I remember
how talking to you that fi rst night felt like coming home, and I
remember the night we made love. I’ll always be glad that you and
I shared ourselves like that. To me, it means that our souls will be
linked together forever.
There’s so much more, too. When I close my eyes, I see your
face; when I walk, it’s almost as if I can feel your hand in mine.
Those things are still real to me, but where they once brought
comfort, now they leave me with an ache. I understood your
reason for staying in the army, and I respected your decision. I
DEAR JOHN 187
still do, but we both know our relationship changed after that. We
changed, and in your heart, I think you realized it, too. Maybe
the time apart was too much, maybe it was just our different
worlds. I don’t know. Every time we fought I hated myself for it.
Somehow, even though we still loved each other, we lost that
magical bond that kept us together.
I know that sounds like an excuse, but please believe me when
I say that I didn’t mean to fall in love with someone else. If I don’t
really understand how it happened, how can you? I don’t expect
you to, but because of all we’ve been through, I just can’t continue
lying to you. Lying would diminish everything we’ve shared, and I
don’t want to do that, even though I know you will feel betrayed.
I’ll understand if you never want to talk to me again, just as I’ll
understand if you tell me that you hate me. Part of me hates me,
too. Writing this letter forces me to acknowledge that, and when I
look in the mirror, I know I’m looking at someone who isn’t sure
she deserves to be loved at all. I mean that.
Even though you may not want to hear it, I want you to know
that you’ll always be a part of me. In our time together, you
claimed a special place in my heart, one I’ll carry with me forever
and that no one can ever replace. You’re a hero and a gentleman,
you’re kind and honest, but more than that, you’re the fi rst man
I ever truly loved. And no matter what the future brings, you
always will be, and I know that my life is better for it.
I’m so sorry—
Savannah

PART I I I
....Z....

She was in love with someone else.
I knew that even before I fi nished reading the letter, and all at
once the world seemed to slow down. My fi rst instinct was to ram
my fi st into a wall, but instead I crumpled up the letter and threw
it aside. I was incredibly angry then; more than feeling betrayed,
I felt as if she’d crushed everything that had any meaning in the
world. I hated her, and I hated the nameless, faceless man who’d
stolen her from me. I fantasized what I would do to him if he ever
crossed my path, and the picture wasn’t pretty.
At the same time, I longed to talk to her. I wanted to fl y home
immediately, or at least call her. Part of me didn’t want to believe
it, couldn’t believe it. Not now, not after everything we’d been
through. We had only nine more months left—after almost three
years, was that so impossible?
But I didn’t go home, and I didn’t call. I didn’t write her back,
nor did I hear from her again. My only action was to retrieve the
letter I’d crumpled. I straightened it as best I could, stuffed it back
in the envelope, and decided to carry it with me like a wound I’d
received in battle. Over the next few weeks, I became the consummate
soldier, escaping into the only world that still seemed real to
me. I volunteered for any mission regarded as dangerous, I barely
Sixteen
....Z....
spoke to anyone in my unit, and for a while it took everything I
had not to be too quick with the trigger while out on patrol. I
trusted no one in the cities, and although there were no unfortunate
“incidents”—as the army likes to call civilian deaths—I’d be
lying if I claimed to have been patient and understanding while
dealing with Iraqis of any kind. Though I barely slept, my senses
were heightened as we continued our spearhead to Baghdad.
Ironically, only while risking my life did I fi nd relief from Savannah’s
image and the reality that our relationship had ended.
My life followed the shifting fortunes of the war. Less than a
month after I received the letter, Baghdad fell, and despite a brief
period of initial promise, things got worse and more complicated
as the weeks and months wore on. In the end, I fi gured, this war
was no different from any other. Wars always come back to the
quest for power among the competing interests, but this understanding
didn’t make life on the ground any easier. In the aftermath
of Baghdad’s fall, every soldier in my squad was thrust into
the roles of policeman and judge. As soldiers, we weren’t trained
for that.
From the outside and with hindsight, it was easy to second-guess
our activities, but in the real world, in real time, decisions weren’t
always easy. More than once, I was approached by Iraqi civilians
and told that a certain individual had stolen this or that item, or
committed this or that crime, and was asked to do something about
it. That wasn’t our job. We were there to keep some semblance of
order—which basically meant killing insurgents who were trying
to kill us or other civilians—until the locals could take over and
handle it themselves. That particular process was neither quick nor
easy, even in places where calm was more frequent than chaos. In
the meantime, other cities were disintegrating into chaos, and we
were sent in to restore order. We’d clear a city of insurgents, but
because there weren’t enough troops to hold the city and keep it
safe, the insurgents would occupy it again soon after we cleared
192 Nicholas Sparks
out. There were days when all of my men wondered at the futility
of that particular exercise, even if they didn’t question it openly.
My point is, I don’t know how to describe the stress and boredom
and confusion of those next nine months, except to say that
there was a lot of sand. Yeah, I know it’s a desert, and yeah, I spent
a lot of time at the beach so I should have been used to it, but the
sand was different over there. It got in your clothes, in your gun,
in locked boxes, in your food, in your ears and up your nose and
between your teeth, and when I spat, I always felt the grit in my
mouth. People can at least relate to that, and I’ve learned that
they don’t want to hear the real truth, which is that most of the
time Iraq wasn’t so bad but sometimes it was worse than hell. Did
people really want to hear that I watched a guy in my unit accidentally
shoot a little kid who just happened to be in the wrong
place at the wrong time? Or that I’d seen soldiers get torn into
pieces when they hit an IED—improvised explosive device—on
the roads near Baghdad? Or that I’d seen blood pooling in the
streets like rain, fl owing past body parts? No, people would rather
hear about sand, because it kept the war at a safe distance.
I did my duty as best I knew how, reupped again, and stayed in
Iraq until February 2004, when I was fi nally sent back to Germany.
As soon as I got back, I bought a Harley and tried to pretend that
I’d left the war unscarred; but the nightmares were endless, and I
woke most mornings drenched in sweat. During the day I was often
on edge, and I got angry at the slightest things. When I walked the
streets in Germany, I found it impossible not to carefully survey
groups of people loitering near buildings, and I found myself scanning
windows in the business district, watching for snipers. The
psychologist—everyone had to see one—told me that what I was
going through was normal and that in time these things would
pass, but I sometimes wondered whether they ever would.
After I left Iraq, my time in Germany felt almost meaningless.
Sure, I worked out in the morning and I took classes on weapons
DEAR JOHN 193
and navigation, but things had changed. Because of the hand
wound, Tony was given a discharge along with his Purple Heart,
and he was sent back to Brooklyn right after Baghdad fell. Four
more of my guys were honorably discharged in late 2003 when
their time was up; in their minds—and mine—they’d done their
duty, and it was time for them to get on with the rest of their lives.
I, on the other hand, had reupped again. I wasn’t sure it was the
right decision, but I didn’t know what else to do.
But now, looking at my squad, I realized that I suddenly felt out
of place. My squad was full of newbies, and though they were great
kids, it wasn’t the same. They weren’t the friends I’d lived with
through boot camp and the Balkans, I hadn’t gone to war with
them, and deep down, I knew I’d never be as close to them as I’d
been to my former squad. For the most part, I was a stranger, and
I kept it that way. I worked out alone and avoided personal contact
as much as possible, and I knew what my squad thought of me
when I walked past them: I was the crusty old sergeant, the one
who claimed to want nothing more than to ensure that they got
back to their moms in one piece. I told my squad that all the time
while we drilled, and I meant it. I would do what it took to keep
them safe. But like I said, it wasn’t the same.
With my friends gone, I devoted myself to my dad as best I could.
After my tour of combat, I spent an extended leave with him in
spring 2004, then another leave with him later that summer. We
spent more time together in those four weeks than we had in the
previous ten years. Because he was retired, we were free to spend
the day however we wished. I fell easily into his routines. We had
breakfast, went for our three walks, and had dinner together. In
between, we talked about coins and even bought a couple while I
was in town. The Internet made that far easier than it had once
been, and though the search wasn’t quite as exciting, I don’t know
that it made any difference to my dad. I found myself talking to
dealers I hadn’t spoken with in over fi fteen years, but they were as
friendly and informative as they’d ever been and remembered me
194 Nicholas Sparks
with pleasure. The coin world, I realized, was a small one, and when
our order arrived—they were always shipped via overnight delivery—
my dad and I would take turns examining the coins, pointing
out any existing fl aws, and usually agreeing with the grade that they
had been assigned by the Professional Coin Grading Service, a
company that evaluates the quality of any coin submitted. Though
my mind would eventually wander to other things, my dad could
stare at a single coin for hours, as if it held the secret of life.
We didn’t talk about much else, but then, we didn’t really need
to. He had no desire to talk about Iraq, and I had no desire to talk
about it, either. Neither of us had a social life to speak of—Iraq
hadn’t been conducive to that—and my dad . . . well, he was my
dad, and I didn’t even bother asking.
Nonetheless, I was worried about him. On his walks, his breathing
was labored. When I suggested that twenty minutes was perhaps
too long, even at his slow pace, he said that the doctor had
told him that twenty minutes was just what he needed, and I knew
there was nothing I could do to convince him otherwise. Afterward,
he was far more tired than he should have been, and it usually
took an hour for the deep color in his cheeks to fade. I spoke
to the doctor, and the news wasn’t what I had hoped. My dad’s
heart, I was told, had sustained major damage, and—in the doctor’s
opinion—it was pretty much a miracle that he was moving as well
as he was. Lack of exercise would be even worse for him.
It might have been that conversation with the doctor, or maybe
it was just that I wanted an improved relationship with my dad, but
we got along better on those two visits than we ever had. Instead
of pressing him for constant conversation, I’d simply sit with him
in his den, reading a book or doing crossword puzzles while he
looked at coins. There was something peaceful and honest about
my lack of expectation, and I think my dad was slowly coming to
grips with the newfound change between us. Occasionally I caught
him peeking at me in a way that seemed almost foreign. We would
spend hours together, most of the time saying nothing at all, and
DEAR JOHN 195
it was in this quiet, unassuming way that we fi nally became friends.
I often found myself wishing that my dad hadn’t thrown away the
photograph of us, and when it was time for me to return to Germany,
I knew that I would miss him in a way I never had before.
Autumn of 2004 passed slowly, as did the winter and spring of
2005. Life dragged on uneventfully. Occasionally, rumors of my
eventual return to Iraq would interrupt the monotony of my days,
but since I’d been there before, the thought of my return affected
me little. If I stayed in Germany, that was fi ne. If I went back to
Iraq, that was fi ne as well. I kept up with what was going on in the
Middle East like everyone else, but as soon as I put down the
newspaper or turned off the television, my mind wandered to
other things.
I was twenty-eight by then, and I couldn’t escape the feeling that
even though I’d experienced more than most people my age, my life
was still on hold. I’d joined the army to grow up, and although a
case could be made that I had, I sometimes wondered whether it
was true. I owned neither a house nor a car, and aside from my dad,
I was completely alone in the world. While my peers stuffed their
wallets with photographs of their children and their wives, my wallet
held a single fading snapshot of a woman I’d loved and lost. I
heard soldiers talking of their hopes for the future, while I was making
no plans at all. Sometimes I wondered what my men thought of
my life, for there were times I caught them staring at me curiously.
I never told them about my past or shared personal information.
They knew nothing of Savannah or my dad or my friendship with
Tony. Those memories were mine and mine alone, for I’d learned
that some things are best kept secret.
In March 2005, my dad had a second heart attack, which led to
pneumonia and another stint in the ICU. Once he was released,
the medication he was on prohibited driving, but the hospital
social worker helped me fi nd someone to pick up the groceries he
needed. In April, he went back to the hospital, where he learned
196 Nicholas Sparks
he’d have to give up his daily walks as well. By May, he was taking
a dozen different pills a day, and I knew he was spending most of
his time in bed. The letters he wrote became almost illegible, not
only because he was weak, but because his hands had begun to
tremble. After a bit of prodding and begging on the phone, I persuaded
a neighbor of my dad’s—a nurse who worked at the local
hospital—to look in on him regularly, and I breathed a sigh of
relief while counting down the days until my leave in June.
But my dad’s condition continued to worsen over the next few
weeks, and on the phone I could hear a weariness that seemed to
deepen every time I spoke with him. For the second time in my
life, I asked for a transfer back home. My commanding offi cer was
more sympathetic than he had been before. We researched it—
even got as far as fi ling the papers to get me posted at Fort Bragg
for airborne training—but when I spoke to the doctor again, I was
told that my proximity wouldn’t do much to help my dad and that
I should consider placing him in an extended care facility. My dad
needed more care than could be provided at home, he assured me.
He’d been trying to convince my father of that for some time—he
was eating only soup by then—but my father refused to consider it
until I returned for my leave. For whatever reason, the doctor explained,
my dad was determined to have me visit him at home one
last time.
The realization was crushing, and in the cab from the airport, I
tried to convince myself that the doctor was exaggerating. But he
wasn’t. My father was unable to rise from the couch when I pushed
open the door, and I was struck by the thought that in the single
year since I’d seen him last, he seemed to have aged thirty years.
His skin was almost gray, and I was shocked by how much weight
he’d lost. With a hard knot in my throat, I put down my bag just
inside the door.
“Hey, Dad,” I said.
At fi rst, I wondered whether he even recognized me, but eventually
I heard a ragged whisper. “Hey, John.”
DEAR JOHN 197
I went to the couch and sat beside him. “You okay?”
“Okay,” was all he said, and for a long time we sat together without
saying anything.
Eventually I rose to inspect the kitchen but found myself blinking
when I got there. Empty soup cans were stacked everywhere.
There were stains on the stove, the garbage was overfl owing, and
moldy dishes were piled in the sink. Stacks of unopened mail
fl ooded the small kitchen table. It was obvious that the house
hadn’t been cleaned in days. My fi rst impulse was to storm over to
confront the neighbor who’d agreed to look in on him. But that
would have to wait.
Instead, I located a can of chicken noodle soup and heated it up
on the fi lthy stove. After fi lling a bowl, I brought it to my father on
a tray. He smiled weakly, and I could see his gratitude. He fi nished
the bowl, scraped at the sides for every morsel, and I fi lled another
bowl, growing even angrier and wondering how long it had been
since he’d eaten. When he polished off that bowl, I helped him lie
back on the couch, where he fell asleep within minutes.
The neighbor wasn’t home, so I spent most of the afternoon and
evening cleaning the house, starting with the kitchen and the
bathroom. When I went to change the sheets on his bed and found
them soiled, I closed my eyes and stifl ed the urge to wring the
neighbor’s neck.
After the house was reasonably clean, I sat in the living room,
watching my dad sleep. He looked so small beneath the blanket,
and when I reached out to stroke his hair, a few strands came out.
I began to cry then, knowing with certainty that my dad was dying.
It was the fi rst time I’d cried in years, and the only time in
my life I’d ever cried for my dad, but for a long time the tears
wouldn’t stop.
I knew that my dad was a good man, a kind man, and though
he’d led a wounded life, he’d done the best he could in raising me.
Never once had he raised his hand in anger, and I began to torment
myself with the memories of all those years I’d wasted blam-
198 Nicholas Sparks
ing him. I remembered my last two visits home, and I ached at the
thought that we would never share those simple times again.
Later, I carried my dad to bed. He was light in my arms, too
light. I pulled the covers up around him and made my bed on the
fl oor beside him, listening to him wheeze and rasp. He woke up
coughing in the middle of the night and seemed unable to stop; I
was getting ready to bring him to the hospital when the coughing
fi nally subsided.
He was terrifi ed when he realized where I wanted to take him.
“Stay . . . here,” he pleaded, his voice weak. “Don’t want to go.”
I was torn, but in the end I didn’t bring him. To a man of routine,
I realized, the hospital was not only foreign, but a dangerous
place, one that took more energy to adjust to than he knew he
could summon. It was then that I realized he’d soiled himself and
the sheets again.
When the neighbor came by the following day, the fi rst words out
of her mouth were an apology. She explained that she hadn’t cleaned
the kitchen for several days because one of her daughters had been
taken ill, but she’d been changing the sheets daily and making sure
he had plenty of canned food. As she stood before me on the porch,
I could see the exhaustion in her face, and all the words of reproach
I’d been rehearsing drained away. I told her that I appreciated what
she’d already done more than she would ever know.
“I was glad to help,” she said. “He’s been so nice over the years.
He never complained about the noise my kids made when they
were teenagers, and he always bought whatever they were selling
when they needed to raise money for school trips or things like
that. He keeps the yard just right, and whenever I asked him to
watch my house, he was always there for me. He’s been the perfect
neighbor.”
I smiled. Encouraged, she went on.
“But you should know that he doesn’t always let me inside anymore.
He told me that he didn’t like where I put things. Or how I
clean. Or the way I moved a stack of papers on his desk. Usually I
DEAR JOHN 199
ignore it, but sometimes, when he’s feeling okay, he’s quite adamant
about keeping me out and he threatened to call the police
when I tried to get past him. I just don’t . . .”
She trailed off, and I fi nished for her.
“You just don’t know what to do.”
Guilt was written plainly on her face.
“It’s okay,” I said. “Without you, I don’t know what he would
have done.”
She nodded with relief before glancing away. “I’m glad you’re
home,” she began hesitantly, “because I wanted to talk to you about
his situation.” She brushed at invisible lint on her clothing. “I know
this great place that he could go where he could be taken care of.
The staff is excellent. It’s almost always at capacity, but I know the
director, and he knows your dad’s doctor. I know how hard this is to
hear, but I think it’s what’s best for him, and I wish . . .”
When she stopped, letting the rest of her statement hang, I felt
her genuine concern for my dad, and I opened my mouth to respond.
But I said nothing. This wasn’t as easy a decision as it
sounded. His home was the only place my father knew, the only
place he felt comfortable. It was the only place his routines made
sense. If staying in the hospital terrifi ed him, being forced to live
someplace new would likely kill him. The question came down to
not only where he should die, but how he should die. Alone at
home, where he slept in soiled sheets and possibly starved to
death? Or with people who would feed and clean him, in a place
that terrifi ed him?
With a quiver in my voice I couldn’t quite control, I asked,
“Where is it?”
I spent the next two weeks taking care of my dad. I fed him the
best I could, read him the Greysheet when he was awake, and slept
on the fl oor beside his bed. He soiled himself every evening, forcing
me to purchase adult diapers for him, much to his embarrassment.
He slept most of the afternoon.
200 Nicholas Sparks
While he rested on the couch, I visited a number of extended
care facilities: not just the one that the neighbor had recommended,
but those within a two-hour radius. In the end, the neighbor was
right. The place she mentioned was clean, and the staff came across
as professional, but most important, the director seemed to have
taken a personal interest in my dad’s care. Whether that was because
of the neighbor or my dad’s doctor, I never found out.
Price wasn’t an issue. The facility was notoriously expensive,
but because my dad had a government pension, Social Security,
Medicare, and private insurance to boot (I could imagine him
signing on the insurance salesman’s dotted line years before without
really understanding what he was paying for), I was assured
that the only cost would be emotional. The director—fortyish and
brown haired, whose kindly manner somehow reminded me of
Tim—understood and didn’t press for an immediate decision.
Instead, he handed me a stack of information and assorted forms
and wished my dad the best.
That evening, I raised the subject of moving to my dad. I was
leaving in a few days and didn’t have a choice, no matter how
much I wanted to avoid it.
He said nothing while I spoke. I explained my reasons, my worries,
my hope that he would understand. He asked no questions,
but his eyes remained wide with shock, as if he’d just heard his
own death sentence.
When I fi nished, I desperately needed a moment alone. I patted
him on the leg and went to the kitchen to get a glass of water.
When I returned to the living room, my dad was hunched over on
the couch, downcast and trembling. It was the fi rst time I ever saw
him cry.
In the morning, I began to pack my dad’s things. I went through his
drawers and his fi les, the cupboards and closets. In his sock drawer,
I found socks; in his shirt drawer, only shirts. In his fi le cabinet,
DEAR JOHN 201
everything was tabbed and ordered. It shouldn’t have been surprising,
but in its own way it was. My dad, unlike most of humanity, had
no secrets at all. He had no hidden vices, no diaries, no embarrassing
interests, no box of private things he kept all to himself. I found
nothing that further enlightened me about his inner life, nothing
that might help me understand him after he was gone. My dad, I
knew then, was just as he’d always seemed to be, and I suddenly
realized how much I admired him for that.
When I fi nished gathering his things, my dad lay awake on the
couch. After a few days of eating regularly, he’d regained a bit of
strength. There was the faintest gleam in his eyes, and I noticed
a shovel leaning against the end table. He held out a scrap of
paper. On it was what appeared to be a hastily scrawled map, labeled
“BACKYARD” in a shaky hand.
“What’s this for?”
“It’s yours,” he said. He pointed to the shovel.
I picked up the shovel, followed the directions on the map to
the oak tree in the backyard, marched off paces, and began to dig.
Within minutes the shovel sounded on metal, and I retrieved a
box. And another one, beneath it. And another to the side. Sixteen
heavy boxes in all. I sat on the porch and wiped the sweat
from my face before opening the fi rst.
I already knew what I’d fi nd, and I squinted at the refl ection of
gold coins shimmering in the harsh sunlight of a southern summer.
At the bottom of that box, I found the 1926-D buffalo nickel,
the one we’d searched for and found together, knowing it was the
only coin that really meant anything to me.
The next day, my last day on leave, I made arrangements for the
house: turning off the utilities, forwarding the mail, fi nding someone
to keep the lawn mowed. I stored the unearthed coins in a
safe-deposit box at the bank. Handling those details took most of
the day. Later, we shared a fi nal bowl of chicken noodle soup and
202 Nicholas Sparks
soft-cooked vegetables for dinner before I brought him to the
extended care facility. I unpacked his things, decorated the room
with items I thought he’d want, and placed a dozen years’ worth
of the Greysheet on the fl oor beneath his desk. But it wasn’t
enough, and after explaining the situation to the director, I went
back to the house again to collect even more knickknacks, all the
while wishing I knew my dad well enough to tell what really mattered
to him.
No matter how much I reassured him, he remained paralyzed
with fear, his eyes tearing me apart. More than once, I was stricken
with the notion that I was killing him. I sat beside him on his bed,
conscious of the few hours remaining before I had to leave for the
airport.
“It’s going to be okay,” I said. “They’re going to take care of
you.”
His hands continued to tremble. “Okay,” he said in a barely
audible voice.
I felt the tears beginning to form. “I want to say something to
you, okay?” I drew breath, focusing my thoughts. “I just want you
to know that I think you’re the greatest dad ever. You had to be
great to put up with someone like me.”
My dad didn’t respond. In the silence, I felt all those things I’d
ever wanted to say to him forcing their way to the surface, words
that had been a lifetime in the making.
“I mean it, Dad. I’m sorry about all the crappy things I put you
through, and I’m sorry that I was never here for you enough. You’re
the best person I’ve ever known. You’re the only one who never got
angry with me, you never judged me, and somehow you taught me
more about life than any son could possibly ask. I’m sorry that I
can’t be here for you now, and I hate myself for doing this to you.
But I’m scared, Dad. I don’t know what else to do.”
My voice sounded hoarse and uneven to my own ears, and I
wanted nothing more than for him to put his arm around me.
“Okay,” he fi nally said.
DEAR JOHN 203
204 Nicholas Sparks
I smiled at his response. I couldn’t help it.
“I love you, Dad.”
To this he knew exactly what to say, for it had always been part
of his routine.
“I love you, too, John.”
I hugged him, then rose and brought him the latest issue of the
Greysheet. When I reached the door, I stopped once more and
faced him.
For the fi rst time since he’d been there, the fear was almost gone.
He held the paper close to his face, and I could see the page shaking
slightly. His lips were moving as he concentrated on the words, and
I forced myself to study him, hoping to memorize his face forever.
It was the last time I ever saw him alive.
My dad died seven weeks later, and I was granted an
emergency leave to attend the funeral.
The fl ight back to the States was a blur. All I could do was stare
out the window at the formless gray of the ocean thousands of feet
below me, wishing I could have been with him in his fi nal moments.
I hadn’t shaved or showered or even changed my clothes
since I’d heard the news, as if going about my daily life meant that
I fully accepted the idea that he was gone.
In the terminal and on the ride back to my house, I found myself
growing angry at the everyday scenes of life around me. I saw
people driving or walking or heading in and out of stores, acting
normal, but for me nothing seemed normal at all.
It was only when I got back to the house that I remembered I’d
turned off the utilities almost two months earlier. Without lights,
the house seemed strangely isolated on the street, as if it didn’t
quite belong. Like my dad, I thought. Or me, I realized. Somehow
that thought made it possible to approach the door.
Wedged in the door frame of our house, I found the business card
of a lawyer named William Benjamin; on the back, he claimed to
represent my dad. With phone service disconnected, I called from
Seventeen
....Z....
206 Nicholas Sparks
the neighbor’s house and was surprised when he showed up at the
house early the following morning, briefcase in hand.
I led him inside the dim house, and he took a seat on the couch.
His suit must have cost more than I earned in two months. After
introducing himself and apologizing for my loss, he leaned forward.
“I’m here because I liked your dad,” he said. “He was one of my
fi rst clients, so there’s no charge for this, by the way. He came to
me right after you were born to make up a will, and every year,
on the same day, I’d get a certifi ed letter in the mail from him
that listed all the coins he’d purchased. I explained to him about
estate taxes, so he’s been gifting them to you ever since you were
a kid.”
I was too shocked to speak.
“Anyway, six weeks ago he wrote me a letter informing me that
you fi nally had the coins in your possession, and he wanted to
make sure everything else was in order, so I updated his will one
last time. When he told me where he was living, I fi gured he
wasn’t doing well, so I called him. He didn’t say much, but he did
give me permission to talk to the director. The director promised
that he’d let me know when or if your dad passed away so I could
meet you. So here I am.”
He started rifl ing through his briefcase. “I know you’re dealing
with the funeral arrangements, and it’s a bad time. But your dad told
me you might not be here for very long and that I should handle his
affairs. Those were his words, by the way, not mine. Okay, here it
is.” He handed over an envelope, heavy with papers. “His will, a list
of every coin in the collection, including quality and the date of
purchase, and all the arrangements for the funeral—which is prepaid,
by the way. I promised him that I’d see the estate all the way
through probate, too, but that won’t be a problem, since the estate
is small and you’re his only child. And if you want, I can fi nd someone
to haul away anything you don’t want to keep and make arrangements
to sell the house, too. Your dad said you might not have
time for that, either.” He closed his briefcase. “As I said, I liked your
DEAR JOHN 207
dad. Usually you have to convince people of the importance of this
stuff, but not your dad. He was one methodical man.”
“Yeah.” I nodded. “He was.”
As the lawyer said, everything had been taken care of. My dad had
chosen the type of graveside service he wanted, he’d had his clothing
dropped off, and he’d even picked his own coffi n. Knowing
him, I guess I should have expected it, but it only reinforced my
belief that I never really understood him.
His funeral, on a warm, rainy August day, was only sparsely attended.
Two former co-workers, the director of the extended care
facility, the lawyer, and the neighbor who’d helped take care of him
were the only ones beside me at the graveside service. It broke my
heart—absolutely broke it into a million pieces—that in all the
world, only these people had seen the worthiness of my dad. After
the pastor fi nished the prayers, he whispered to me to see if I wanted
to add anything. By then my throat was tight as a drum, and it took
everything I had to simply shake my head and decline.
Back at home, I sat tentatively on the edge of my dad’s bed. By then
the rain had stopped, and gray sunlight slanted through the window.
The house had a musty, almost moldy odor, but I could still smell
the scent of my dad on his pillow. Beside me was the envelope the
lawyer had brought me. I poured out the contents. The will was on
top, as were some other documents. Beneath it, however, was the
framed photograph that my dad had removed from his desk so long
ago, the only existing photograph of the two of us.
I brought it to my face and stared at it until tears fi lled my eyes.
Later that afternoon, Lucy, my long-ago ex, arrived. When she
fi rst stood at my doorstep, I didn’t know what to say. Gone was the
suntanned girl from my wild years; in her place was a woman
dressed in a dark, expensive pantsuit and a silk blouse.
“I’m sorry, John,” she whispered, coming toward me. We hugged,
208 Nicholas Sparks
holding each other close, and the sensation of her body against
mine was like a glass of cool water on a hot summer day. She wore
the lightest trace of perfume, one I couldn’t place, but it made me
think of Paris, even though I’d never been there.
“I just read the obituary,” she said after pulling back. “I’m sorry
I couldn’t make it to the funeral.”
“It’s okay,” I said. I motioned to the couch. “You want to come
in?”
She sat beside me, and when I noticed she wasn’t wearing her
wedding ring, she subconsciously moved her hand.
“It didn’t work out,” she said. “I got divorced last year.”
“I’m sorry.”
“I am, too,” she said, reaching for my hand. “You doing okay?”
“Yeah,” I lied. “I’m okay.”
We talked for a while about old times; she was skeptical of my
claim that her fi nal phone call had led me to join the army. I told
her that it was exactly what I needed at the time. She spoke about
her career—she helped design and set up retail spaces in department
stores—and asked what Iraq was like. I told her about the
sand. She laughed and then asked no more about it. In time, our
conversation slowed to a trickle as we realized how much we both
had changed. Maybe it was because we’d been close once, or
maybe it was because she was a woman, but I could feel her scrutinizing
me and already knew what she would ask next.
“You’re in love, aren’t you,” she whispered.
I folded my hands in my lap and faced the window. Outside,
the sky was again dark and cloudy, portending even more rain.
“Yes,” I admitted.
“What’s her name?”
“Savannah,” I said.
“Is she here?”
I hesitated. “No.”
“Do you want to talk about it?”
No, I wanted to say. I don’t want to talk about it. I’d learned in
DEAR JOHN 209
the army that stories like ours were both boring and predictable,
and though everyone asked, no one really wanted to hear them.
But I told her the story from beginning to end, in more detail
than I should have, and more than once, she reached for my hand.
I hadn’t realized how hard it had been to keep it inside, and by the
time I trailed off, I think she knew I needed to be alone. She kissed
me on the cheek as she left, and when she was gone, I paced the
house for hours. I drifted from room to room, thinking of my dad
and thinking of Savannah, feeling like a foreigner, and gradually
coming to the realization that there was somewhere else I had
to go.
T
hat night, I slept in my dad’s bed, the only time I’d done that in my life. The storm had passed, and the temperature
had risen to miserable levels. Even opening the windows wasn’t
enough to keep me cool, and I tossed and turned for hours. When
I crawled out of bed the next morning, I found my dad’s car keys
on the peg-board in the kitchen. I threw my gear into the back of
his car and picked out a few things from the house that I wanted
to keep. Aside from the photograph, there wasn’t much. After
that, I called the lawyer and took him up on his offer to fi nd someone
to haul away the rest and sell the house. I dropped the house
key in the mail.
In the garage, it took a few seconds for the engine to catch. I
backed the car out of the drive, closed the garage door, and locked
up. From the yard, I stared at the house, thinking of my father and
knowing that I’d never see this place again.
I drove to the extended care facility, picked up my dad’s things, then
left Wilmington, heading west along the interstate, moving on
autopilot. It had been years since I’d seen this stretch of road, and
I was only dimly aware of the traffi c, but the sense of familiarity
Eighteen
....Z....
DEAR JOHN 211
came back in waves. I passed the towns of my youth and headed
through Raleigh toward Chapel Hill, where memories fl ashed with
painful intensity, and I found myself pushing the accelerator, trying
to leave them behind.
I drove on through Burlington, Greensboro, and Winston-Salem.
Aside from a single gas stop earlier in the day where I’d also picked
up a bottle of water, I pressed forward, sipping water but unable to
stomach the thought of eating. The photograph of my father and me
lay on the seat beside me, and every now and then I would try to
recall the boy in the picture. Eventually I turned north, following a
small highway that wound its way through blue-tipped mountains
spreading north and south, a gentle swell in the crust of the earth.
It was late afternoon by the time I pulled the car to a stop and
checked into a shabby motel just off the highway. My body was stiff,
and after taking a few minutes to stretch, I showered and shaved. I
put on a clean pair of jeans and a T-shirt and debated whether or
not to get something to eat, but I still wasn’t hungry. With the sun
hanging low, the air had none of the sultry humid heat of the coast,
and I caught the scent of conifers drifting down from the mountains.
This was the place of Savannah’s birth, and somehow I knew
she was still here.
Though I could have gone to her parents’ house and asked, I
discarded the idea, uncertain how they’d react to my presence.
Instead I drove the streets of Lenoir, passing through the retail
district, complete with the assorted collection of fast-food restaurants,
and began to slow the car only when I reached the less
generic part of town. Here was the part of Lenoir that hadn’t
changed, where newcomers and tourists were welcome to visit but
would never be considered locals. I pulled into a run-down pool
hall, a place that reminded me of some of my own youthful haunts.
Neon signs advertising beer hung in the windows, and the parking
lot was full out front. It was in a place like this that I would fi nd
the answer I needed.
212 Nicholas Sparks
I went inside. Hank Williams blared from the jukebox, and ribbons
of cigarette smoke drifted in the air. Four pool tables were
clustered together; every player was wearing a baseball hat, and two
had obvious wads of chewing tobacco parked in their cheeks. Trophy
bass had been mounted on the walls, surrounded by NASCAR
memorabilia. There were photos taken at Talladega and Martinsville,
North Wilkesboro and Rockingham, and though my opinion
of the sport hadn’t changed, the sight put me strangely at ease. At
the corner of the bar, below the smiling face of the late Dale Earnhardt,
was a jar fi lled with cash, asking for donations to help a local
victim of cancer. Feeling an unexpected pull of sympathy, I threw
in a couple of dollars.
I took a seat at the bar and struck up a conversation with the
bartender. He was about my age, and his mountain accent reminded
me of Savannah’s. After twenty minutes of easy conversation, I
took Savannah’s picture from my wallet and explained that I was a
friend of the family. I used her parents’ names and asked questions
that implied I’d been there before.
He was wary, and rightfully so. Small towns protect their own,
but it turned out that he’d spent a couple of years in the Marine
Corps, which helped. In time, he nodded.
“Yeah, I know her,” he said. “She lives out on Old Mill Road,
next to her parents’ place.”
It was just after eight in the evening, and the sky was graying as
dusk began to settle in. Ten minutes later, I left a big tip on the bar
and made my way out the door.
My mind was curiously blank as I headed into horse country. At
least, that’s how I remembered thinking of it the last time I was
here. The road I drove slanted ever upward, and I began to recognize
the landmarks of the area; I knew that in a few minutes I’d
pass Savannah’s parents’ house. When I did, I leaned over the
steering wheel, watching for the next break in the fence before
DEAR JOHN 213
turning onto a long gravel road. As I made the turn, I saw a handpainted
sign for something called “Hope and Horses.”
The crackle of my tires as they rolled over gravel was oddly comforting,
and I pulled to a stop beneath a willow tree, next to a small
battered pickup truck. I looked toward the house. Steep roofed and
square, with fl aking white paint and a chimney pointing toward the
sky, it seemed to rise from the earth like a ghostly image a hundred
years in the making. A single bulb glowed above the battered front
door, and a small potted plant hung near an American fl ag, both
moving gently in the breeze. Off to the side of the house was a
weathered barn and a small corral; beyond that, an emerald-covered
pasture enclosed by a tidy white fence stretched toward a line of
massive oak trees. Another shedlike structure stood near the barn,
and in the shadows I could see the outlines of aging fi eld equipment.
I found myself wondering again what I was doing here.
It wasn’t too late to leave, but I couldn’t force myself to turn
the car around. The sky fl ared red and yellow before the sun
dipped below the horizon, casting the mountains in moody darkness.
I emerged from the car and began to approach the house.
The dew on the grass moistened the tips of my shoes, and I caught
the scent of conifers once more. I could hear the sounds of crickets
chirping and the steady call of a nightingale. The sounds
seemed to give me strength as I stepped onto the porch. I tried to
fi gure out what I would say to her if she answered the door. Or
what I would say to him. While I was trying to decide what to do,
a tail-wagging retriever approached me.
I held out my hand, and his friendly tongue lapped against it
before he turned and trotted down the steps again. His tail continued
to swish back and forth as he headed around the house,
and hearing the same call that had brought me to Lenoir, I left
the porch and followed him. He dipped low, skimming his belly
as he crawled beneath the lowest rung of the fence, and trotted
into the barn.
214 Nicholas Sparks
As soon as the dog had disappeared, I saw Savannah emerge
from the barn with rectangles of hay clamped beneath her arms.
Horses from the pasture began to canter toward her as she tossed
the hay into various troughs. I continued moving forward. She was
brushing herself off and getting ready to head back into the barn
when she inadvertently glanced my way. She took a step, looked
again, and then froze in place.
For a long moment, neither of us moved. With her gaze locked
on mine, I realized that it was wrong to have come, to have shown
up without warning like this. I knew I should say something, anything,
but nothing came to mind. All I could do was stare at her.
The memories came rushing back then, all of them, and I noticed
how little she’d changed since I’d last seen her. Like me, she
was wearing jeans and a T-shirt, smudged with dirt, and her cowboy
boots were scuffed and worn. Somehow the hardscrabble look
gave her an earthy appeal. Her hair was longer than I remembered,
but she still had the slight gap between her front teeth that
I had always loved.
“Savannah,” I fi nally said.
It wasn’t until I spoke that I realized she’d been as spellbound as
I. All at once, she broke into a wide smile of innocent pleasure.
“John?” she cried.
“It’s good to see you again.”
She shook her head, as if trying to clear her mind, then
squinted at me again. When at last she was convinced I wasn’t a
mirage, she jogged to the gate and bounded through it. A moment
later I could feel her arms around me, her body warm and
welcoming. For a second it was as if nothing between us had
changed at all. I wanted to hold her forever, but when she pulled
back, the illusion was shattered, and we were strangers once
more. Her expression held the question I’d been unable to answer
on the long trip here.
“What are you doing here?”
DEAR JOHN 215
I looked away. “I don’t know,” I said. “I just needed to come.”
Though she asked nothing, there was a mixture of curiosity
and hesitation in her expression, as if she weren’t sure she
wanted a further explanation. I took a small step backward, giving
her space. I could see the shadowy outlines of the horses in
the darkness and felt the events of the last few days coming back
to me.
“My dad died,” I whispered, the words seeming to come from
nowhere. “I just came from his funeral.”
She was quiet, her expression softening into the spontaneous
compassion I’d once been so drawn to.
“Oh, John . . . I’m so sorry,” she murmured.
She drew near again, and there was an urgency to her embrace
this time. When she pulled back, her face was half in shadow.
“How did it happen?” she asked, her hand lingering on mine.
I could hear the authentic sorrow in her voice, and I paused,
unable to sum up the last couple of years into a single statement.
“It’s a long story,” I said. In the glare of the barn lights, I thought
I could see in her gaze traces of memories that she wanted to keep
buried, a life from long ago. When she released my hand, I saw her
wedding band glinting on her left fi nger. The sight of it doused me
with a cold splash of reality.
She recognized my expression. “Yes,” she said, “I’m married.”
“I’m sorry,” I said, shaking my head. “I shouldn’t have come.”
Surprising me, she gave a small wave of her hand. “It’s okay,” she
said, tilting her head. “How’d you fi nd me?”
“It’s a small town.” I shrugged. “I asked someone.”
“And they just . . . told you?”
“I was persuasive.”
It was awkward, and neither of us seemed to know what to say.
Part of me fully expected to continue standing there while we
caught up like old friends on everything that had happened in our
lives since we’d last seen each other. Another part of me expected
216 Nicholas Sparks
her husband to pop out of the house any minute and either shake
my hand or challenge me to fi ght. In the silence a horse neighed,
and over her shoulder I could see four horses with their heads
lowered into the trough, half in shadow, half in the circle of the
barn’s light. Three other horses, including Midas, were staring at
Savannah, as if wondering whether she’d forgotten them. Savannah
fi nally motioned over her shoulder.
“I should get them going, too,” she said. “It’s their feeding time,
and they’re getting antsy.”
When I nodded, Savannah took a step backward, then turned.
Just as she reached the gate, she beckoned. “Do you want to give
me a hand?”
I hesitated, glancing toward the house. She followed my gaze.
“Don’t worry,” she said. “He’s not here, and I could really use the
help.” Her voice was surprisingly steady.
Though I wasn’t sure what to make of her response, I nodded.
“I’d be glad to.”
She waited for me and shut the gate behind us. She pointed to a
pile of manure. “Watch out for their droppings. They’ll stain your
shoes.”
I groaned. “I’ll try.”
In the barn, she separated a chunk of hay and then two more
and handed them both to me.
“Just toss those in the troughs next to the others. I’m going to
get the oats.”
I did as she directed, and the horses closed in. Savannah came
out holding a couple of pails.
“You might want to give them a little room. They might accidentally
knock you over.”
I stepped away, and Savannah hung a couple of pails on the
fence. The fi rst group of horses trotted toward them. Savannah
watched them, her pride evident.
“How many times do you have to feed them?”
“Twice a day, every day. But there’s more than just feeding.
DEAR JOHN 217
You’d be amazed at how clumsy they can be sometimes. We have
the veterinarian on speed dial.”
I smiled. “Sounds like a lot of work.”
“They are. They say owning a horse is like living with an anchor.
Unless you have someone else help out, it’s tough to get away, even
for a weekend.”
“Do your parents pitch in?”
“Sometimes. When I really need them. But my dad’s getting
older, and there’s a big difference between taking care of one horse
and taking care of seven.”
“I’ll take your word for it.”
In the warm embrace of the night, I listened to the steady hum
of cicadas, breathing in the peace of this refuge, trying to still my
racing thoughts.
“This is just the kind of place I imagined you’d live,” I fi nally
said.
“Me too,” she said. “But it’s a lot harder than I thought it would
be. There’s always something that needs to be repaired. You can’t
imagine how many leaks there were in the barn, and big stretches
of the fence collapsed last winter. That’s what we worked on during
the spring.”
Though I heard her use of “we” and assumed she was talking
about her husband, I wasn’t ready to talk about him yet. Nor, it
seemed, was she.
“But it is beautiful here, even if it’s a lot of work. On nights like
this, I like to sit on the porch and just listen to the world. You
hardly ever hear cars driving by, and it’s just so . . . peaceful. It
helps to clear the mind, especially after a long day.”
As she spoke, I felt for the measure of her words, sensing her
desire to keep our conversation on safe footing.
“I’ll bet.”
“I need to clean some hooves,” she announced. “You want to
help?”
“I don’t know what to do,” I admitted.
218 Nicholas Sparks
“It’s easy,” she said. “I’ll show you.” She vanished into the barn
and walked out carrying what looked to be a couple of small
curved nails. She handed one to me. As the horses were eating,
she moved toward one.
“All you have to do is grab near the hoof and tug while you tap
the back of his leg here,” she said, demonstrating. The horse, occupied
with his hay, obediently lifted his hoof. She propped the
hoof between her legs. “Then, just dig out the dirt around the shoe.
That’s all there is to it.”
I moved toward the horse beside her and tried to replicate her
actions, but nothing happened. The horse was both exceedingly
large and stubborn. I tugged again at the foot and tapped in the
right place, then tugged and tapped some more. The horse continued
to eat, ignoring my efforts.
“He won’t lift his foot,” I complained.
She fi nished the hoof she was working on, then bent next to
my horse. A tap and tug later, the hoof was in place between her
legs. “Sure he will. He just knows you don’t know what you’re
doing and that you’re uncomfortable around him. You have to be
confi dent about this.” She let the hoof drop, and I took her place,
trying again. The horse ignored me once more.
“Watch what I do,” she said carefully.
“I was watching,” I protested.
She repeated the drill; the horse lifted his foot. A moment later
I mimicked her exactly, and the horse ignored me. Though I
couldn’t claim to read the mind of a horse, I had the strange notion
that this one was enjoying my travails. Frustrated, I tapped
and tugged relentlessly until fi nally, as if by magic, the horse’s
foot lifted. Despite the minimal nature of my accomplishment,
I felt a surge of pride. For the fi rst time since I’d arrived, Savannah
laughed.
“Good job. Now just scrape the mud out and go to the next
hoof.”
DEAR JOHN 219
Savannah had fi nished the other six horses by the time I fi nished
one. When we were done, she opened the gate and the
horses trotted into the darkened pasture. I wasn’t sure what to
expect, but Savannah moved toward the shed. She had two shovels
in hand.
“Now it’s time to clean up,” she said, handing me a shovel.
“Clean up?”
“The manure,” she said. “Otherwise it can get pretty rank around
here.”
I took the shovel. “You do this every day?”
“Life’s a peach, isn’t it?” she teased. She left again and returned
with a wheelbarrow.
As we began scooping the manure, the sliver of a moon began
its rise over the treetops. We worked in silence, the clink and
scrape of her shovel a steady rhythm that fi lled the air. In time we
both fi nished, and I leaned on my shovel, inspecting her. In the
shadows of the barnyard, she seemed as lovely and elusive as a
wraith. She said nothing, but I could feel her evaluating me.
“Are you okay?” I fi nally asked.
“Why are you here, John?”
“You already asked me that.”
“I know I did,” she said. “But you didn’t really answer.”
I studied her. No, I hadn’t. I wasn’t sure I could explain it myself
and shifted my weight from one foot to the other. “I didn’t know
where else to go.”
Surprising me, she nodded. “Uh-huh,” she acknowledged.
It was the unqualifi ed acceptance in her voice that made me
go on.
“I mean it,” I said. “In some ways, you were the best friend I’ve
ever had.”
I could see her expression soften. “Okay,” she said. Her response
reminded me of my father, and after she answered, perhaps she
realized it as well. I forced myself to survey the property.
220 Nicholas Sparks
“This is the ranch you dreamed of starting, isn’t it?” I asked.
“Hope and Horses is for autistic kids, isn’t it?”
She ran a hand through her hair, tucking a strand behind her ear.
She seemed pleased that I remembered. “Yes,” she said. “It is.”
“Is it everything you thought it would be?”
She laughed and threw up her hands. “Sometimes,” she said.
“But don’t think for a second it earns enough to pay the bills. We
both have jobs, and every day I realize that I didn’t learn as much
in school as I thought I did.”
“No?”
She shook her head. “Some of the kids who show up here, or at
the center, are diffi cult to reach.” She hesitated, trying to fi nd the
right words. Finally she shook her head. “I guess I thought they’d
all be like Alan, you know?” She looked up. “Do you remember
when I told you about him?”
When I nodded, she went on. “It turns out that Alan’s situation
was special. I don’t know—maybe it was because he’d grown up
on a ranch, but he adapted to this a lot more easily than most
kids.”
When she didn’t continue, I gave her a quizzical look. “That’s
not the way I remember you telling it to me. From what I remember,
Alan was terrifi ed at fi rst.”
“Yeah, I know, but still . . . he did get used to it. And that’s the
thing. I can’t tell you how many kids we have here who never
adapt at all, no matter how long we work with them. This isn’t
just a weekend thing; some kids have come here regularly for
more than a year. We work at the developmental evaluation
center, so we’ve spent a lot of time with most of the kids, and
when we started the ranch, we insisted on opening it up to kids
no matter how severe their condition. We felt it was an important
commitment, but with some kids . . . I just wish I knew how
to get through to them. Sometimes it feels like we’re just spinning
our wheels.”
I could see Savannah cataloging her memories. “I don’t mean
DEAR JOHN 221
that we feel like we’re wasting our time,” she went on. “Some kids
really benefi t from what we’re doing. They come out here and
spend a couple of weekends, and it’s like . . . a fl ower bud slowly
blossoming into something beautiful. Just like it did with Alan.
It’s like you can sense their mind opening up to new ideas and
possibilities, and when they’re riding with a great big smile on
their faces, it’s like nothing else matters in the world. It’s a heady
feeling, and you want it to happen over and over with every child
who comes here. I used to think it was a matter of persistence, that
we could help everyone, but we can’t. Some of the kids never even
get close to the horse, let alone ride it.”
“You know that’s not your fault. I wasn’t too thrilled with the
idea of riding, either, remember?”
She giggled, sounding remarkably girlish. “Yeah, I remember.
The fi rst time you got on a horse, you were more scared than a lot
of the kids.”
“No, I wasn’t,” I protested. “And besides, Pepper was frisky.”
“Ha!” she cried. “Why do you think I let you ride him? He’s just
about the easiest horse you can imagine. I don’t think he’s ever so
much as shimmied when someone rode him.”
“He was frisky,” I insisted.
“Spoken like a true rookie,” she teased. “But even if you’re
wrong, I’m touched that you still remember it.”
Her playfulness summoned a tidal wave of memories.
“Of course I remember,” I said. “Those were some of the best days
of my life. I won’t ever forget them.” Over her shoulder, I could see
the dog wandering in the pasture. “Maybe that’s why I’m still not
married.”
At my words, her gaze faltered. “I still remember them, too.”
“Do you?”
“Of course,” she said. “You might not believe it, but it’s true.”
The weight of her words hung heavy in the air.
“Are you happy, Savannah?” I fi nally asked.
She offered a wry smile. “Most of the time. Aren’t you?”
222 Nicholas Sparks
“I don’t know,” I said, which made her laugh again.
“That’s your standard answer, you know. When you’re asked to
look into yourself for the answer? It’s like a refl ex with you. It
always has been. Why don’t you ask me what you really wanted
to ask.”
“What did I really want to ask?”
“Whether or not I love my husband. Isn’t that what you mean?”
she asked, looking away for a moment.
For an instant I was speechless, but I realized her instincts were
correct. It was the real reason I was here.
“Yes,” she said at last, reading my mind again. “I love him.”
The unmistakable sincerity in her tone stung, but before I could
dwell on it, she turned to face me again. Anxiety fl ickered in her
expression, as if she were remembering something painful, but it
passed quickly.
“Have you eaten yet?” she asked.
I was still trying to make sense of what I’d just seen. “No,” I said.
“Actually, I didn’t have breakfast or lunch, either.”
She shook her head. “I’ve got some leftover beef stew in the
house. Do you have time for dinner?”
Though I wondered again about her husband, I nodded. “I’d like
that,” I said.
We started toward the house and stopped when we reached
a porch lined with muddy and worn cowboy boots. Savannah
reached for my arm in a way that struck me as being remarkably
easy and natural, using me for balance as she slipped off her
boots. It was, perhaps, her touch that emboldened me to really
look at her, and though I saw the mysteriousness and maturity
that had always made her attractive, I noticed a hint of sadness
and reticence as well. To my aching heart, the combination
made her even more beautiful.
Her small kitchen was what one would expect from an
old house that had probably been remodeled half a dozen times
over the last century: ancient linoleum fl oors that were peeling
slightly near the walls; functional, unadorned white cabinets—
thick with countless paint jobs—and a stainless-steel sink set
beneath a wood-framed window that probably should have been
replaced years ago. The countertop was cracking, and against one
wall stood a woodstove as old as the house itself. In places, it was
possible to see the modern world encroaching: a large refrigerator
and dishwasher near the sink; a microwave propped kitty-corner
near a half-empty bottle of red wine. In some ways, it reminded
me of my dad’s place.
Savannah opened a cupboard and removed a wineglass. “Would
you like a glass of wine?”
I shook my head. “I’ve never been much of a wine drinker.”
I was surprised when she didn’t return the glass. Instead, she retrieved
the half-empty bottle of wine and poured a glass; she set the
glass on the table and took a seat before it.
We sat at the table as Savannah took a sip.
“You’ve changed,” I observed.
Nineteen
....Z....
224 Nicholas Sparks
She shrugged. “A lot of things have changed since I last saw
you.”
She said nothing more and set her glass back on the table.
When she spoke again, her voice was subdued. “I never thought
I’d be the kind of person who looked forward to a glass of wine in
the evenings, but I do.”
She began rotating the glass on the table, and I found myself
wondering what had happened to her.
“You know the funny thing?” she said. “I actually care how it
tastes. When I had my fi rst glass, I didn’t know what was good or
what was bad. Now when it comes to buying, I’ve become pretty
selective.”
I didn’t fully recognize the woman who sat before me, and I
wasn’t sure how to respond.
“Don’t get me wrong,” she went on. “I still remember everything
my folks taught me, and I hardly ever have more than a glass
a night. But since Jesus himself turned water into wine, I fi gured
that it can’t be much of a sin.”
I smiled at her logic, recognizing how unfair it was to cling to
the time-capsule version I held of her. “I wasn’t asking.”
“I know,” she said. “But you were wondering.”
For a moment, the only sound in the kitchen was the low hum
of the refrigerator. “I’m sorry about your dad,” she said, tracing a
crack in the tabletop. “I really am. I can’t tell you how many times
I’ve thought about him in the past few years.”
“Thank you,” I said.
Savannah began rotating her glass again, seemingly lost in the
swirl of liquid. “Do you want to talk about it?” she asked.
I wasn’t sure I did, but as I leaned back in my chair, the words
came surprisingly easily. I told her about my dad’s fi rst heart attack,
and the second, and the visits we’d shared in the past couple of
years. I told her about our growing friendship, and the comfort I felt
with him, the walks that he began taking and then eventually gave
up. I recounted my fi nal days with him and the agony of committing
DEAR JOHN 225
him to an extended care facility. When I described the funeral and
the photograph I found in the envelope, she reached for my hand.
“I’m glad he saved it for you,” she said, “but I’m not surprised.”
“I was,” I said, and she laughed. It was a reassuring sound.
She squeezed my hand. “I wish I’d have known. I would have
liked to go to the funeral.”
“It wasn’t much.”
“It didn’t have to be. He was your dad, and that’s all that matters.”
She hesitated before releasing my hand and took another sip
of wine.
“Are you ready to eat?” she asked.
“I don’t know,” I said, fl ushing at the memory of her earlier
comment.
She leaned forward with a grin. “How about I heat you up a
plate of stew and we’ll see what happens.”
“Is it any good?” I asked. “I mean . . . when I knew you before,
you never mentioned that you knew how to cook.”
“It’s our special family recipe,” she said, pretending to be offended.
“But I’ve got to be honest—my mom made it. She brought
it over yesterday.”
“The truth comes out,” I said.
“That’s the funny thing about the truth,” she said. “It usually
does.” She rose and opened the refrigerator, bending over as she
scanned the shelves. I found myself wondering about the ring on
her fi nger and where her husband was as she pulled out the Tupperware.
She scooped some of the stew into a bowl and placed it in
the microwave.
“Do you want anything else with that? How about some bread
and butter?”
“That would be great,” I agreed.
A few minutes later, the meal was spread before me, and the
aroma reminded me for the fi rst time of how hungry I actually was.
Surprising me, Savannah took her place again, holding her glass
of wine.
226 Nicholas Sparks
“Aren’t you going to eat?”
“I’m not hungry,” she said. “Actually, I haven’t been eating
much lately.” She took a sip as I took my fi rst bite and I let her
comment pass.
“You’re right,” I said. “It’s delicious.”
She smiled. “Mom’s a good cook. You’d think I would have
learned more about cooking, but I didn’t. I was always too busy.
Too much studying when I was young, and then lately, too much
remodeling.” She motioned toward the living room. “It’s an old
house. I know it doesn’t look like it, but we’ve done a lot of work
in the past couple of years.”
“It looks great.”
“You’re just being polite, but I appreciate it,” she replied. “You
should have seen the place when I moved in. It was kind of like
the barn, you know? We needed a new roof, but it’s funny—no
one ever thinks of roofs when they’re imagining what to remodel.
It’s one of those things that everyone expects a house to have but
never thinks might one day need replacing. Almost everything
we’ve done falls into that category. Heat pumps, thermal windows,
fi xing the termite damage . . . there were a lot of long days.” She
wore a dreamy expression on her face. “We did most of the work
ourselves. Like with the kitchen here. I know we need new cabinets
and fl ooring, but when we moved in, there were puddles in
the living room and bedrooms every time it rained. What were we
supposed to do? We had to prioritize, and one of the fi rst things
we did was to tear all the old shingles from the roof. It must have
been a hundred degrees and I’m up there with a shovel, scraping
shingles off, getting blisters. But . . . it just felt right, you know?
Two young people starting out in the world, working together and
repairing their home? There was such a sense of . . . togetherness
about it. It was the same thing when we did the fl oor in the living
room. It must have taken a couple of weeks to sand it down and
get it level again. We stained it and added a layer of varnish, and
DEAR JOHN 227
when we fi nally walked across it, it felt like we’d laid the foundation
for the rest of our lives.”
“You make it sound almost romantic.”
“It was, in a way,” she agreed. She tucked a strand of hair behind
her ear. “But lately it’s not so romantic. Now, it’s just getting old.”
I laughed unexpectedly, then coughed and found myself reaching
for a glass that wasn’t there.
She pushed back from her chair. “Let me get you some water,”
she said. She fi lled a glass from the faucet and placed it before me.
As I drank, I could feel her watching me.
“What?” I asked.
“I just can’t get over how different you look.”
“Me?” I found it hard to believe.
“Yeah, you,” she insisted. “You’re . . . older somehow.”
“I am older.”
“I know, but it’s not that. It’s your eyes. They’re . . . more serious
than they used to be. Like they’ve seen things they shouldn’t have.
Weary, somehow.”
To this, I said nothing, but when she saw my expression, she
shook her head, looking embarrassed. “I shouldn’t have said that.
I can only imagine what you’ve been through lately.”
I ate another bite of stew, thinking about her comment. “Actually
I left Iraq in early 2004,” I said. “I’ve been in Germany ever
since. Only a small part of the army is ever there at any one time,
and we rotate through. I’ll probably end up going back, but I don’t
know when. Hopefully things will have calmed down by then.”
“Weren’t you supposed to be out by now?”
“I reupped again,” I said. “There wasn’t any reason not to.”
We both knew the reason why, and she nodded. “How long
now?”
“I’m in until 2007.”
“And then?”
“I’m not sure. I might stay in for a few more years. Or maybe I’ll
228 Nicholas Sparks
go to college. Who knows—I might even pick up a degree in special
education. I’ve heard great things about the fi eld.”
Her smile was strangely sad, and for a while, neither of us said
anything. “How long have you been married?” I asked.
She shifted in her seat. “It’ll be two years next November.”
“Were you married here?”
“As if I had a choice.” She rolled her eyes. “My mom was
really into the whole perfect wedding thing. I know I’m their
only daughter, but in hindsight, I would have been just as happy
with something a lot smaller. A hundred guests would have been
perfect.”
“You consider that small?”
“Compared with what we ended up with? Yeah. There weren’t
enough seats in the church for everyone, and my dad keeps reminding
me that he’ll be paying it off for years. He’s just teasing,
of course. Half the guests were friends of my parents, but I guess
that’s what you get when you get married in your hometown.
Everyone from the mailman to the barber gets an invitation.”
“But you’re glad to be back home?”
“It’s comfortable here. My parents are close by, and I need that,
especially now.”
She didn’t elaborate, content to let her comment stand. I wondered
about that—and a hundred other things—as I rose from the
table and brought my plate to the sink. After rinsing it, I heard her
call out behind me.
“Just leave it there. I haven’t unloaded the dishwasher yet. I’ll get
it later. Do you want anything else, though? My mom left a couple
of pies on the counter.”
“How about a glass of milk?” I said. As she started to rise, I added,
“I can get it. Just point me to the glasses.”
“In the cupboard by the sink.”
I pulled a glass from the shelf and went to the refrigerator. Milk
was on the top shelf; on the shelves below were at least a dozen
DEAR JOHN 229
Tupperware containers fi lled with food. I poured a glass and returned
to the table.
“What’s going on, Savannah?”
With my words, she came back to me. “What do you mean?”
“Your husband,” I said.
“What about him?”
“When can I meet him?”
Instead of answering, Savannah rose from the table with her
wineglass. She poured the remains into the sink, then retrieved a
coffee cup and a box of tea.
“You’ve already met him,” she said, turning around. She squared
her shoulders. “It’s Tim.”
I could hear the spoon tapping against the cup as Savannah sat
across from me again.
“How much of this do you want to hear?” she murmured, staring
into her teacup.
“All of it,” I said. I leaned back in my chair. “Or none of it. I’m
not sure yet.”
She snorted. “I guess that makes sense.”
I brought my hands together. “When did it start?”
“I don’t know,” she said. “I know that sounds crazy, but it didn’t
happen like you probably think. It wasn’t as if either of us planned
it.” She set her spoon on the table. “But to give some kind of
answer, I guess it started in early 2002.”
A few months after I’d reupped, I realized. Six months before
my father had his fi rst heart attack and right around the time I
noticed that her letters to me had begun to change.
“You know we’ve been friends. Even though he was a graduate
student, we ended up having a couple of classes in the same building
during my last year in college, and afterwards, we’d have coffee
or end up studying together. It’s not like we dated, or even held
hands. Tim knew I was in love with you . . . but he was there, you
230 Nicholas Sparks
know? He listened when I talked about how much I missed you
and how hard it was to be apart. And it was hard. I thought you’d
be home by then.”
When she looked up, her eyes were fi lled with . . . What? Regret?
I couldn’t tell.
“Anyway, we spent a lot of time together, and he was good at
consoling me whenever I got down. He’d always remind me that
you’d be back on leave before I knew it, and I can’t tell you how
much I wanted to see you again. And then your dad got sick. I know
you had to be with him—I would never have forgiven you if you
hadn’t stayed by his side—but it wasn’t what we needed. I know
how selfi sh that sounds, and I hate myself for even thinking it. It
just felt like fate was conspiring against us.”
She put her spoon in the tea and stirred again, collecting her
thoughts.
“That fall, right after I fi nished up with all my classes and
moved back home to work at the developmental evaluation center
here in town, Tim’s parents were in a horrible accident. They
were driving back from Asheville when they lost control of their
car and swerved into oncoming traffi c on the highway. A semi
ended up hitting them. The driver of the truck wasn’t hurt, but
both of Tim’s parents died on impact. Tim had to quit school—he
was trying to get his PhD—so he could come back here to take
care of Alan.” She paused. “It was awful for Tim. Not only was
he trying to come to terms with the loss—he adored his parents—
but Alan was inconsolable. He screamed all the time, and
he began pulling out his hair. The only one who could stop him
from hurting himself was Tim, but it took all the energy Tim had.
I guess that’s when I fi rst started coming over here. You know, to
help out.”
When I frowned, she added, “This was Tim’s parents’ house.
Where Tim and Alan grew up.”
As soon as she said it, the memory came back. Of course it was
DEAR JOHN 231
Tim’s—she’d once told me that Tim lived on the ranch next
to hers.
“We just ended up consoling each other. I tried to help him,
and he tried to help me, and we both tried to help Alan. And
little by little, I guess, we began to fall in love.”
For the fi rst time, she met my eyes.
“I know you want to be angry with Tim or me. Probably both of
us. And I guess we deserve it. But you don’t know what it was like
back then. So much was going on—it was just so emotional all the
time. I felt guilty about what was happening, Tim felt guilty. But
after a while, it just began to feel like we were a couple already. Tim
started working at the same developmental evaluation center
where I did and then decided that he wanted to start a weekend
ranch program for autistic kids. His parents always wanted him to
do that, so I signed on to work on the ranch, too. After that, we
were together almost all the time. Setting up the ranch gave us
both something to focus on, and it helped Alan, too. He loves
horses, and there was so much to do that he gradually got used to
the fact that his parents weren’t around. It’s like we were all leaning
on each other. . . . He proposed later that year.”
When she stopped, I turned away, trying to digest her words. We
sat in silence for a while, each of us wrestling with our thoughts.
“Anyway, that’s the story,” she concluded. “I don’t know how
much more you want to hear.”
I wasn’t sure, either.
“Does Alan still live here?” I asked.
“He’s got a room upstairs. Actually, it’s the same room he’s always
had. It’s not as hard as it sounds, though. After he’s fi nished feeding
and brushing the horses, he usually spends most of his time alone.
He loves video games. He can play for hours. Lately I haven’t been
able to get him to stop. He’d play all night long if I’d let him.”
“Is he here now?”
She shook her head. “No,” she said. “Right now he’s with Tim.”
232 Nicholas Sparks
“Where?”
Before she could answer, the dog scratched insistently at the
door, and Savannah got up to open it. The dog padded in,
tongue out and tail still wagging. He trotted toward me and
nuzzled my hand.
“He likes me,” I said.
Savannah was still near the door. “She likes everyone. Her
name’s Molly. Worthless as a guard dog, but sweeter than candy.
Just try to avoid the drool. She’ll drip all over you if you let her.”
I glanced at my jeans. “I can see that.”
Savannah motioned over her shoulder. “Listen, I just realized
I’ve still got to put some things away. It’s supposed to rain tonight.
It shouldn’t take long.”
I noted that she hadn’t answered the question about Tim. Nor,
I realized, did she plan to.
“Need a hand?”
“Not really. But you’re welcome to come. It’s a beautiful night.”
I followed her out, and Molly trotted ahead of us, completely
forgetting that she’d just begged to come inside. When an owl
broke from the trees, Molly galloped into the darkness and vanished.
Savannah pulled on her boots again.
We walked toward the barn. I thought about everything she’d
told me and wondered again why I’d come. I wasn’t sure if I was
happy that she’d married Tim—since they’d seemed so perfect for
each other—or upset for exactly the same reason. Nor was I glad
that I fi nally knew the truth; somehow, I realized, it was easier not
to know. All at once, I simply felt tired.
And yet . . . there was something I knew she wasn’t telling me.
I heard it in her voice, in the hint of sadness that wouldn’t go
away. As the darkness surrounded us, I was acutely aware of how
close we were walking together, and I wondered whether she felt
the same. If she did, she gave no sign.
The horses were mere shadows in the distance, shapes without
DEAR JOHN 233
recognizable form. Savannah retrieved a couple of bridles and
brought them to the barn, hanging them on a couple of pegs.
While she did, I collected the shovels we’d been using and set them
with the rest of the tools. On our way out, she made sure to shut
the gate.
Glancing at my watch, I saw it was nearly ten o’clock. It was
late, and we were both conscious of the hour.
“I guess I should probably get going,” I said. “It’s a small town.
I don’t want to start any rumors.”
“You’re probably right.” Molly wandered up, appearing from
nowhere, and sat between us. When she lapped at Savannah’s leg,
she stepped to the side. “Where are you staying?” she asked.
“Something or other motor court. Just off the highway.”
Her nose crinkled, if only for an instant. “I know the place.”
“It is kind of a dive,” I admitted.
She smiled. “I can’t say I’m surprised. You always did have a way
of fi nding the most unique places.”
“Like the Shrimp Shack?”
“Exactly.”
I pushed my hands into my pockets, wondering whether this was
the last time I’d ever see her. If so, it struck me as absurdly anticlimactic;
I didn’t want it to end in small talk, but I couldn’t think
of anything else to say.
On the road out front, the headlights of an approaching car
fl ashed over the property as it sped past the house.
“I guess that’s it, then,” I said, at a loss. “It was good seeing you
again.”
“You, too, John. I’m glad you came by.”
I nodded again. When she looked away, I took it as my cue to
leave.
“Good-bye,” I said.
“Bye.”
I turned from the porch and started toward my car, dazed at the
234 Nicholas Sparks
thought it was really and truly over. I wasn’t sure I’d expected anything
different, but the fi nality brought to the surface all those
feelings I’d been repressing since I’d read her last letter.
I was opening the door when I heard her call out.
“Hey, John?”
“Yeah?”
She stepped off the porch and started toward me. “Are you going
to be around tomorrow?”
As she drew near, her face half in shadow, I knew with certainty
that I was still in love with her. Despite the letter, despite her
husband. Despite the fact that we could never be together now.
“Why?” I asked.
“I was wondering if you’d like to drop by. Around ten. I’m sure
Tim would like to see you. . . .”
I was shaking my head even before she fi nished. “I’m not sure
that’s such a good idea—”
“Could you do it for me?”
I knew she wanted me to see that Tim was still the same man I
remembered, and in a sense, I knew she was asking because she
wanted forgiveness. Still . . .
She reached out to take my hand. “Please. It would mean a lot
to me.”
Despite the warmth of her hand, I didn’t want to come back. I
didn’t want to see Tim, I didn’t want to see the two of them together
or sit around the table pretending that all seemed right in
the world. But there was something plaintive about her request
that made it impossible to turn her down.
“Okay,” I said. “Ten o’clock.”
“Thank you.”
A moment later, she turned. I stayed in place, watching her
climb onto the porch before I got in the car. I turned the key and
backed out. Savannah turned on the porch, waving one last time.
I waved, then headed out to the road, her image growing smaller
DEAR JOHN 235
in the rearview mirror. Watching her, I felt a sudden dryness in
my throat. Not because she was married to Tim, and not at the
thought of seeing them both tomorrow. It came from watching
Savannah as I was driving away, standing on her porch, crying
into her hands.
T
he following morning, Savannah was standing on the porch, and she waved as I pulled in the drive. She stepped forward
as I brought the car to a stop. I half expected Tim to appear in the
doorway behind her, but he was nowhere to be seen.
“Hey,” she said, touching my arm. “Thanks for coming.”
“Yeah,” I said, giving a reluctant shrug.
I thought I saw a fl ash of understanding in her eyes before she
asked, “Did you sleep okay?”
“Not really.”
At that, she gave a wry smile. “Are you ready?”
“As I’ll ever be.”
“Okay,” she said. “Just let me get the keys. Unless you’d like to
drive.”
I didn’t catch her meaning at fi rst. “We’re leaving?” I nodded
toward the house. “I thought we were going to see Tim.”
“We are,” she said. “He’s not here.”
“Where is he?”
It was as if she hadn’t heard me. “Do you want to drive?”
“Yeah, I guess so,” I said, not bothering to hide my confusion
but somehow knowing she’d clear things up when she was ready.
I opened the door for her and went around the driver’s side to slide
Twenty
....Z....
behind the wheel. Savannah was running her hand over the dashboard,
as if trying to prove to herself it was real.
“I remember this car.” Her expression was nostalgic. “It’s your
dad’s, right? Wow, I can’t believe it’s still running.”
“He didn’t drive all that much,” I said. “Just to work and the
store.”
“Still.”
She put on her seat belt, and despite myself, I wondered whether
she’d spent the night alone.
“Which way?” I asked.
“At the road, take a left,” she said. “Head toward town.”
Neither of us spoke. Instead, she stared out the passenger window
with her arms crossed. I might have been offended, but there was
something in her expression that told me her preoccupation had
nothing to do with me, and I left her alone with her thoughts.
On the outskirts of town, she shook her head, as if suddenly
conscious of how quiet it was in the car. “I’m sorry,” she said. “I
guess my company leaves a lot to be desired.”
“It’s okay,” I said, trying to mask my growing curiosity.
She pointed toward the windshield. “At the next corner, take
a right.”
“Where are we going?”
She didn’t answer right away. Instead, she turned and gazed out
the passenger window.
“The hospital,” she fi nally said.
I followed her through seemingly endless corridors, fi nally stopping
at the visitors’ check-in. Behind the desk, an elderly volunteer
held out a clipboard. Savannah reached for the pen and began
signing her name automatically.
“You holdin’ up, Savannah?”
“Trying,” Savannah murmured.
“It’ll all turn out okay. You’ve got the whole town prayin’ for
him.”
DEAR JOHN 237
“Thanks,” Savannah said. She handed back the clipboard, then
looked at me. “He’s on the third fl oor,” she explained. “The elevators
are just down the hall.”
I followed her, my stomach churning. We reached the elevator
just as someone was getting off, and stepped inside. When the
doors closed, it felt as if I were in a tomb.
When we reached the third fl oor, Savannah started down the
hallway with me trailing behind. She stopped in front of a room
with a door propped open and then turned to face me.
“I think I should probably go in fi rst,” she said. “Can you wait
here?”
“Of course.”
She fl ashed her appreciation, then turned away. She drew a long
breath before entering the room. “Hey, honey,” I heard her call out,
her tone bright. “You doing okay?”
I didn’t hear any more than that for the next couple of minutes.
Instead I stood in the hallway, absorbing the same sterile,
impersonal surroundings I’d noticed while visiting with my
father. The air reeked of a nameless disinfectant, and I watched
as an orderly wheeled a cart of food into a room down the hall.
Halfway up the corridor, I saw a group of nurses clustered in the
station. Behind the door across the hallway, I could hear someone
retching.
“Okay,” Savannah said, poking her head out. Beneath her brave
appearance, I could still see her sadness. “You can come in. He’s
ready for you.”
I followed her in, bracing myself for the worst. Tim sat propped
up in the bed with an IV connected to his arm. He looked exhausted,
and his skin was so pale that it was almost translucent.
He’d lost even more weight than my father had, and as I stared
at him, all I could think was that he was dying. Only the kindness
in his eyes was unaffected. On the other side of the room
was a young man—late teens or early twenties, maybe—rolling
238 Nicholas Sparks
his head from side to side, and I knew immediately it was Alan.
The room was crowded with fl owers: dozens of bouquets and
greeting cards stacked on every available tabletop and ledge.
Savannah sat on the bed beside her husband and reached for his
hand.
“Hey, Tim,” I said.
He looked too tired to smile, but he managed. “Hey, John. Good
to see you again.”
“You too,” I said. “How are you?”
As soon as I said it, I knew how ridiculous it sounded. Tim must
have been used to it, for he didn’t fl inch.
“I’m okay,” he said. “I’m feeling better now.”
I nodded. Alan continued to roll his head, and I found myself
watching him, feeling like an intruder in events I wished I could
have avoided.
“This is my brother, Alan,” he said.
“Hi, Alan.”
When Alan didn’t respond, I heard Tim whisper to him, “Hey,
Alan? It’s okay. He’s not a doctor. He’s a friend. Go say hello.”
It took a few seconds, but Alan fi nally rose from his seat. He
walked stiffl y across the room, and though he wouldn’t meet my
eyes, he extended his hand. “Hi, I’m Alan,” he said in a surprisingly
deep monotone.
“Nice to meet you,” I said, taking his hand. It was limp; he
pumped once, then let go and went back to his seat.
“There’s a chair if you’d like to sit,” Tim said.
I wandered farther into the room and took a seat. Before I
could even ask, I heard Tim already answering the question on
my mind.
“Melanoma,” he said. “In case you’re wondering.”
“But you’ll be okay, right?”
Alan’s head rolled even faster, and he began to slap his thighs.
Savannah turned away. I already knew I shouldn’t have asked.
DEAR JOHN 239
“That’s what the doctors are for,” Tim replied. “I’m in good
hands.” I knew the answer was more for Alan than me, and Alan
began to calm down.
Tim closed his eyes, then opened them again, as if trying to concentrate
his strength. “I’m glad to see you made it back in one
piece,” he said. “I prayed for you the whole time you were in Iraq.”
“Thank you,” I said.
“What have you been up to? Still in the army, I guess.”
He nodded toward my crew cut, and I ran my hand over it.
“Yeah. Seems like I’m becoming a lifer.”
“Good,” he said. “The army needs people like you.”
I said nothing. The scene struck me as surreal, like watching
yourself in a dream. Tim turned to Savannah. “Sweetheart—would
you walk with Alan and get him a soda? He hasn’t had anything
to drink since earlier this morning. And if you can, maybe you can
talk him into eating.”
“Sure,” she said. She kissed him on the forehead and rose from
the bed. She stopped in the doorway. “Come on, Alan. Let’s get
something to drink, okay?”
To me, it seemed as if Alan were slowly processing the words.
Finally, he got up and followed Savannah; she placed a gentle
hand on his back on the way out the door. When they were gone,
Tim faced me again.
“This whole thing is really hard on Alan. He’s not taking it
well.”
“How can he?”
“Don’t let the rolling of his head fool you, though. It’s got nothing
to do with autism or his intelligence. It’s more like a tic he gets
when he’s nervous. The same thing when he started slapping his
thighs. He knows what’s going on, but it affects him in ways that
usually make other people uncomfortable.”
I clasped my hands. “It didn’t make me uncomfortable,” I said.
“My dad had his things, too. He’s your brother, and it’s obvious
that he’s worried. It makes sense.”
240 Nicholas Sparks
Tim smiled. “That’s kind of you to say. A lot of people get
frightened.”
“Not me,” I said, shaking my head. “I know I could take him.”
Remarkably, he laughed, although it seemed to take a lot out
of him.
“I’m sure you could,” he said. “Alan’s gentle. Probably too
gentle. He won’t even swat fl ies.”
I nodded, recognizing that all this small talk was just his way of
making me feel more comfortable. It wasn’t working.
“When did you fi nd out?”
“A year ago. A mole on the back of my calf started to itch, and
when I scratched at it, it started to bleed. Of course, I didn’t think
much of it then, until it bled again the next time I scratched at
it. Six months ago, I went to the doctor. That was on a Friday. I
had surgery on Saturday and started interferon on Monday. Now,
I’m here.”
“You’ve been in the hospital all this time?”
“No. I’m here only off and on. Usually, interferon is done on an
outpatient basis, but me and the interferon don’t get along. I don’t
tolerate it that well, so now they do it here. In case I get too sick
and become dehydrated. Like I did yesterday.”
“I’m sorry,” I said.
“I am, too.”
I looked around the room, my eyes landing on a cheaply framed
bedside photo of Tim and Savannah standing with their arms
around Alan. “How’s Savannah holding up?” I asked.
“Like you’d expect.” Tim traced a crease in his hospital sheet
with his free hand. “She’s been great. Not only with me, but with
the ranch, too. She’s had to handle everything lately, but she
never complains about it. And whenever she’s around me, she
tries to be strong. She keeps telling me that it’s all going to work
out.” He formed the ghost of a smile. “Half the time, I even believe
her.”
When I didn’t respond, he struggled to sit up higher in the bed.
DEAR JOHN 241
He winced, but the pain passed, and he became himself again.
“Savannah told me you had dinner at the ranch last night.”
“Yeah,” I said.
“I’ll bet she was glad to see you. I know she’s always felt bad that
it ended the way it did, and so did I. I owe you an apology.”
“Don’t.” I raised my hands. “It’s okay.”
He formed a wry grin. “You’re only saying that because I’m sick,
and we both know it. If I was healthy, you’d probably want to
break my nose again.”
“Maybe,” I admitted, and though he laughed again, this time I
could hear the sound of sickness in it.
“I deserve it,” he said, oblivious to my thoughts. “I know you
might not believe it, but I feel bad about what happened. I know
you two really cared about each other.”
I leaned forward, propping myself on my elbows. “Water under
the bridge,” I said.
I didn’t believe it, and he didn’t believe me when I said it. But
it was enough for both of us to put it to rest. “What brought you
here? After all this time?”
“My dad passed away,” I said. “Last week.”
Despite his condition, his face refl ected genuine sympathy. “I’m
sorry, John. I know how much he meant to you. Was it sudden?”
“At the end, it always is. But he’d been sick for a while.”
“It doesn’t make it any easier.”
I found myself wondering whether he was referring just to me
or to Savannah and Alan as well.
“Savannah told me you lost both your parents.”
“A car accident,” he said, drawing out the words. “It was . . .
unbelievable. We’d just had dinner with them a couple of nights
before, and the next thing you know, I’m making arrangements for
their funerals. It still doesn’t seem real. Whenever I’m at home, I
keep expecting to see my mom in the kitchen or my dad puttering
around the garden.” He hesitated, and I knew he was replaying
242 Nicholas Sparks
those images. At last he shook his head. “Did that happen to you?
When you were home?”
“Every single minute.”
He leaned his head back. “I guess it’s been a rough couple of
years for both of us. It’s enough to test your faith.”
“Even for you?”
He gave a halfhearted grin. “I said test. I didn’t say that it
ended it.”
“No, I don’t suppose it would have.”
I heard a nurse’s voice approaching, and though I thought she
was going to enter, she passed by on her way to another room.
“I’m glad you came to see Savannah,” he said. “I know it sounds
trite considering all that you two have been through, but she
needs a friend right now.”
My throat was tight. “Yeah,” was all I could think to say.
He grew quiet, and I knew he would say no more about it. In
time, he drifted off to sleep, and I sat there watching him, my
mind curiously blank.
“I’m sorry I didn’t tell you yesterday,” Savannah said to me an hour
later. When she and Alan had returned to the room to fi nd Tim
sleeping, she’d motioned for me to follow her downstairs to the
cafeteria. “I was surprised to see you, and I knew I should have said
something, but every time I tried, I just couldn’t.”
Two cups of tea were on the table, since neither of us felt like
eating. Savannah lifted her cup and set it back down again.
“It had just been one of those days, you know? I’d spent hours
in the hospital, and the nurses kept giving me those pitiful looks
and . . . well, they just feel like they’re killing me little by little. I
know that sounds ridiculous considering what Tim is going
through, but it’s so hard to watch him get sick. I hate it. I know I
have to be there to support him, and the thing is, I want to be
there, but it’s always worse than I expect. He was so sick after his
DEAR JOHN 243
treatment yesterday that I thought he was dying. He couldn’t stop
vomiting, and when nothing else would come up, he just kept dry
heaving. Every fi ve or ten minutes, he’d start to moan and move
around the bed trying to prevent it, but there was nothing he
could do. I’d hold him and comfort him, but I can’t even begin to
describe how helpless it made me feel.” She lifted her bag of tea
in and out of the water. “It’s like that every time,” she said.
I fi ddled with the handle of my cup. “I wish I knew what to
say.”
“There’s nothing you can say, and I know that. That’s why I’m
talking to you. Because I know that you can handle it. I don’t
really have anyone else. None of my friends can even relate to
what I’m going through. My mom and dad have been great . . .
kind of. I know they’d do anything that I ask, and they’re always
offering to help, and Mom brings over our meals, but every time
she drops off the food, she’s just a bundle of nerves. She’s always
on the verge of crying. It’s like she’s terrifi ed of saying or doing
anything wrong, so when she’s trying to help, it’s like I have to
support her, too, instead of the other way around. Added to everything
else, it’s almost too much sometimes. I hate to say that
about her because she’s doing her best and she’s my mom and I
love her, but I just wish she’d be stronger, you know?”
Remembering her mother, I nodded. “How about your dad?”
“The same, but in a different way. He avoids the topic. He
doesn’t want to talk about it at all. When we’re together, he talks
about the ranch or my job—anything but Tim. It’s like he’s trying
to make up for Mom’s incessant worrying, but he never asks what’s
been going on or how I’m holding up.” She shook her head. “And
then there’s Alan. Tim’s so good with him, and I like to think I’m
getting better with him, but still . . . there are times when he starts
hurting himself or breaking things, and I just end up crying because
I don’t know what to do. Don’t get me wrong—I try, but I’m
not Tim, and we both know it.”
244 Nicholas Sparks
Her eyes held mine for a moment before I looked away. I took
a sip of tea, trying to imagine what her life was like now.
“Did Tim tell you what’s going on? With his melanoma?”
“A little,” I said. “Not enough to know the whole story. He told
me he found a mole and that it was bleeding. He put it off for a
while, then fi nally went to see a doctor.”
She nodded. “It’s one of those crazy things, isn’t it? I mean, if Tim
spent a lot of time in the sun, maybe I could have understood it. But
it was on the back of his leg. You know him—can you imagine him
in Bermuda shorts? He’s hardly ever worn shorts, even at the beach,
and he’s always the one who nagged us about wearing sunscreen. He
doesn’t drink, he doesn’t smoke, he’s careful about what he eats. But
for whatever reason, he got melanoma. They cut out the area
around the mole, and because of its size, they took out eighteen of
his lymph nodes. Out of the eighteen, one was positive for melanoma.
He started interferon—that’s the standard treatment, and it
lasts a full year—and we tried to stay optimistic. But then things
started going wrong. First with the interferon, and then a few weeks
after surgery, he got cellulitis near the groin incision.”
When I frowned, she caught herself.
“Sorry. I’m just so used to talking to doctors these days. Cellulitis
is a skin infection, and Tim’s was pretty serious. He spent ten
days in the intensive care unit for that. I thought I was going to
lose him, but he’s a fi ghter, you know? He got through it and continued
with his treatment, but last month we found cancerous lesions
near the site of his original melanoma. That, of course, meant
another round of surgery, but even worse, it meant that the interferon
probably wasn’t working as well as it could. So he got a PET
scan and an MRI, and sure enough, they found some cancerous
cells in his lung.”
She stared into her coffee cup. I felt speechless and drained, and
for a long time, we were quiet.
“I’m sorry,” I fi nally whispered.
DEAR JOHN 245
My words brought her back. “I’m not going to give up,” she said,
her voice beginning to crack. “He’s such a good man. He’s sweet
and he’s patient, and I love him so much. It’s just not fair. We
haven’t even been married for two years.”
She looked at me and took a few deep breaths, trying to regain
her composure.
“He needs to get out of here. Out of this hospital. All they can
do here is interferon, and like I said, it’s not working as well as it
should. He needs to go someplace like MD Anderson or the Mayo
Clinic or Johns Hopkins. There’s cutting-edge research going on
in those places. If interferon isn’t doing the job like it should,
there might be another drug they can add—they’re always trying
different combinations, even if they’re experimental. They’re
doing biochemotherapy and clinical trials at other places. MD
Anderson is even supposed to start testing a vaccine in November—
not for prevention like most vaccines, but for treatment—
and the preliminary data has shown good results. I want him to be
part of that trial.”
“So go,” I urged.
She gave a short laugh. “It’s not that easy.”
“Why? It sounds pretty clear to me. Once he’s out of here, you
hop in the car and go.”
“Our insurance won’t pay for it,” she said. “Not now, anyway.
He’s getting the appropriate standard of care—and believe it or not,
the insurance company has been pretty responsive so far. They’ve
paid for all the hospitalizations, all the interferon, and all the extras
without hassle. They’ve even assigned me a personal caseworker,
and believe me, she’s sympathetic to our plight. But there’s nothing
she can do, since our doctor thinks it’s best that we give the interferon
a little more time. No insurance company in the world will
pay for experimental treatments. And no insurer will agree to pay
for treatments outside the standard of care, especially if they’re in
other states and are attempting new things on the off chance that
they might work.”
246 Nicholas Sparks
“Sue them if you have to.”
“John, our insurer hasn’t batted an eyelash at all the costs for
intensive care and extra hospitalizations, and the reality is that Tim
is getting the appropriate treatment. The thing is, I can’t prove that
Tim would get better in another place, receiving alternate treatments.
I think it might help him, I hope it will help him, but no one
knows for sure that it would.” She shook her head. “Anyway, even
if I did sue and the insurance company ended up paying for everything
I demanded, that would take time . . . and that’s what we don’t
have.” She sighed. “My point is, it’s not just a money problem, it’s
a time problem.”
“How much are you talking about?”
“A lot. And if Tim ends up in the hospital with an infection and
in the intensive care unit—like he has before—I can’t even begin
to guess. More than I could ever hope to pay, that’s for sure.”
“What are you going to do?”
“Get the money,” she said. “I don’t have a choice. And the
community’s been supportive. As soon as word about Tim got out,
there was a segment on the local news and the newspaper did a
story, and people all over town have promised to start collecting
money. They set up a special bank account and everything. My
parents helped. The place we worked helped. Parents of some of the
kids we worked with helped. I’ve heard that they’ve even got jars
out in a lot of the businesses.”
My mind fl ashed to the sight of the jar at the end of the bar in
the pool hall, the day I arrived in Lenoir. I’d thrown in a couple of
dollars, but suddenly it felt completely inadequate.
“Are you close?”
“I don’t know.” She shook her head, as if unwilling to think
about it. “All this just started happening a little while ago, and
since Tim had his treatment, I’ve been here and at the ranch. But
we’re talking about a lot of money.” She pushed aside her cup of
tea and offered a sad smile. “I don’t even know why I’m telling you
this. I mean, I can’t guarantee that any of those other places can
DEAR JOHN 247
even help him. All I can tell you is that if we stay, I know he’s not
going to make it. He might not make it anyplace else, either, but
at least there’s a chance . . . and right now, that’s all I have.”
She stopped, unable to continue, staring sightlessly at the
stained tabletop.
“You want to know what’s crazy?” she asked fi nally. “You’re the
only one I’ve told this to. Somehow, I know that you’re the only
one who can possibly understand what I’m going through, without
having to feel like I have to be careful about what I say.” She lifted
her cup, then set it down again. “I know it’s unfair considering
your dad. . . .”
“It’s okay,” I reassured her.
“Maybe,” she said. “But it’s selfi sh, too. You’re trying to work
through your own emotions about losing your dad, and here I am,
saddling you with mine about something that might or might not
happen.” She turned to look out the cafeteria’s window, but I knew
she wasn’t seeing the sloping lawn beyond.
“Hey,” I said, reaching for her hand. “I meant it. I’m glad you told
me, if only so you could get it off your chest.”
In time, Savannah shrugged. “So that’s us, huh? Two wounded
warriors looking for support.”
“That sounds about right.”
Her eyes rose to meet mine. “Lucky us,” she whispered.
Despite everything, I felt my heart skip a beat.
“Yeah,” I echoed. “Lucky us.”
We spent most of the afternoon in Tim’s room. He was asleep when
we got there, woke for a few minutes, then slept again. Alan kept
vigil at the foot of his bed, ignoring my presence while he focused
on his brother. Savannah alternately stayed beside Tim on the bed
or sat in the chair next to mine. When she was close, we spoke of
Tim’s condition, of skin cancer in general, the specifi cs of possible
alternative treatments. She’d spent weeks researching on the Internet
and knew the details of every clinical trial in progress. Her voice
248 Nicholas Sparks
never rose above a whisper; she didn’t want Alan to overhear. By
the time she was fi nished, I knew more about melanoma than I
imagined possible.
It was a little after the dinner hour when Savannah fi nally rose.
Tim had slept for most of the afternoon, and by the tender way
she kissed him good-bye, I knew she believed he’d sleep most of
the night as well. She kissed him a second time, then squeezed his
hand and motioned toward the door. We crept out quietly.
“Let’s head to the car,” she said once we were out in the
hallway.
“Are you coming back?”
“Tomorrow. If he does wake, I don’t want to give him a reason
to feel like he has to stay awake. He needs his rest.”
“What about Alan?”
“He rode his bike,” she said. “He rides here every morning and
comes back late at night. He won’t come with me, even if I ask. But
he’ll be okay. He’s been doing the same thing for months now.”
A few minutes later, we left the hospital parking lot and
turned into the fl ow of evening traffi c. The sky was turning a
thickening gray, and heavy clouds were on the horizon, portending
the same kinds of thunderstorms common to the coast. Savannah
was lost in thought and said little. In her face, I saw
refl ected the same exhaustion that I felt. I couldn’t imagine having
to come back tomorrow, and the next day, and the day after
that, all the while knowing there was a possibility he could get
better somewhere else.
When we pulled in the drive, I looked over at Savannah and
noticed a tear trickling slowly down her cheek. The sight of it
nearly broke my heart, but when she saw me staring at her, she
swiped at the tear, looking surprised at its appearance. I pulled the
car to a stop beneath the willow tree, next to the battered truck.
By then, the fi rst few drops of rain were beginning to hit the windshield.
As the car idled in place, I wondered again whether this was
DEAR JOHN 249
good-bye. Before I could think of something to say, Savannah
turned toward me. “Are you hungry?” she asked. “There’s a ton of
food in the fridge.”
Something in her gaze warned me that I should decline, but I
found myself nodding. “I would love something to eat,” I said.
“I’m glad,” she said, her voice soft. “I don’t really want to be alone
tonight.”
We got out of the car as the rain began to fall harder. We made
a dash for the front door, but by the time we reached the porch, I
could feel the wetness soaking through the fabric of my clothes.
Molly heard us, and as Savannah pushed open the door, the dog
surged past me through the kitchen to what I assumed was the living
room. As I watched the dog, I thought about my arrival the day
before and how much had changed in the time we’d been apart. It
was too much to process. Much the way I had while on patrol in
Iraq, I steeled myself to focus only on the present yet remain alert
to what might come next.
“We’ve got a bit of everything,” she called out on her way to the
kitchen. “That’s how my mom’s been handling all of this. Cooking.
We have stew, chili, chicken pot pie, barbecued pork, lasagna . . .”
She poked her head out of the refrigerator as I entered the kitchen.
“Does anything sound appetizing?”
“It doesn’t matter,” I said. “Whatever you want.”
At my answer, I saw a fl ash of disappointment on her face and
knew instantly that she was tired of having to make decisions. I
cleared my throat.
“Lasagna sounds good.”
“Okay,” she said. “I’ll get some going right now. Are you super
hungry or just hungry?”
I thought about it. “Hungry, I guess.”
“Salad? I’ve got some black olives and tomatoes I could add. It’s
great with ranch dressing and croutons.”
“That sounds terrifi c.”
250 Nicholas Sparks
“Good,” she said. “It won’t take long.”
I watched as Savannah pulled out a head of lettuce and tomato
from the bottom drawer of the fridge. She rinsed them under the
faucet, diced the tomatoes and the lettuce, and added both to a
wooden bowl. Then she topped off the salad with olives and set it
on the table. She scooped out generous portions of lasagna onto two
plates and popped the fi rst into the microwave. There was a steady
quality to her movements, as if she found the simple task at hand
reassuring.
“I don’t know about you, but I could use a glass of wine.” She
pointed to a small rack on the countertop near the sink. “I’ve got
a nice Pinot Noir.”
“I’ll try a glass,” I said. “Do you need me to open it?”
“No, I’ve got it. My corkscrew is kind of temperamental.”
She opened the wine and poured two glasses. Soon she was sitting
across from me, our plates before us. The lasagna was steaming,
and the aroma reminded me of how hungry I actually was. After
taking a bite, I motioned toward it with my fork.
“Wow,” I commented. “This is really good.”
“It is, isn’t it?” she agreed. Instead of taking a bite, however,
she took a sip of wine. “It’s Tim’s favorite, too. After we got married,
he was always pleading with my mom to make him a batch.
She loves to cook, and it makes her happy to see people enjoying
her food.”
Across the table, I watched as she ran her fi nger around the
rim of her glass. The red wine trapped the light like the facet of
a ruby.
“If you want more, I’ve got plenty,” she added. “Believe me,
you’d be doing me a favor. Most of the time, the food just goes to
waste. I know I should tell her to bring less, but she wouldn’t take
that well.”
“It’s hard for her,” I said. “She knows you’re hurting.”
“I know.” She took another drink of wine.
DEAR JOHN 251
“You are going to eat, aren’t you?” I gestured at her untouched
plate.
“I’m not hungry,” she said. “It’s always like this when Tim’s in
the hospital . . . I heat something up, I look forward to eating, but
as soon as it’s in front of me, my stomach shuts down.” She stared
at her plate as if willing herself to try, then shook her head.
“Humor me,” I urged. “Take a bite. You’ve got to eat.”
“I’ll be okay.”
I paused, my fork halfway up. “Do it for me, then. I’m not used
to people watching me eat. This feels weird.”
“Fine.” She picked up her fork, scooped a tiny wedge onto it,
and took a bite. “Happy now?”
“Oh yeah,” I snorted. “That’s exactly what I meant. That makes
me feel a whole lot more comfortable. For dessert, maybe we can
split a couple of crumbs. Until then, though, just keep holding the
fork and pretending.”
She laughed. “I’m glad you’re here,” she said. “These days, you’re
the only one who would even think of talking to me like that.”
“Like what? Honestly?”
“Yes,” she said. “Believe it or not, that’s exactly what I meant.”
She set down her fork and pushed her plate aside, ignoring my
request. “You were always good like that.”
“I remember thinking the same thing about you.”
She tossed her napkin on the table. “Those were the days,
huh?”
The way she was looking at me made the past come rushing back,
and for a moment I relived every emotion, every hope and dream
I’d ever had for us. She was once again the young woman I’d met
on the beach with her life ahead of her, a life I wanted to make part
of my own.
Then she ran a hand through her hair, causing the ring on her
fi nger to catch the light. I lowered my eyes, focusing on my plate.
“Something like that.”
252 Nicholas Sparks
I shoveled in a bite, trying and failing to erase those images. As
soon as I swallowed, I stabbed at the lasagna again.
“What’s wrong?” she asked. “Are you mad?”
“No,” I lied.
“You’re acting mad.”
She was the same woman I remembered—except that she was
married. I took a gulp of wine—one gulp, I noticed, was equivalent
to all the sips she’d taken. I leaned back in my chair. “Why am I
here, Savannah?”
“I don’t know what you mean,” she said.
“This,” I said, motioning around the kitchen. “Asking me in for
dinner, even though you won’t eat. Bringing up the old days. What’s
going on?”
“Nothing’s going on,” she insisted.
“Then what is it? Why did you ask me in?”
Instead of answering the question, she rose and refi lled her glass
with wine. “Maybe I just needed someone to talk to,” she whispered.
“Like I said, I can’t talk to my mom or dad; I can’t even talk
to Tim like this.” She sounded almost defeated. “Everybody needs
somebody to talk to.”
She was right, and I knew it. It was the reason I’d come to
Lenoir.
“I understand that,” I said, closing my eyes. When I opened
them again, I could feel Savannah evaluating me. “It’s just that
I’m not sure what to do with all this. The past. Us. You being
married. Even what’s happening to Tim. None of this makes
much sense.”
Her smile was full of chagrin. “And you think it makes sense
to me?”
When I said nothing, she set aside her glass. “You want to
know the truth?” she asked, not waiting for an answer. “I’m just
trying to make it through the day with enough energy to face
tomorrow.” She closed her eyes as if the admission were painful,
DEAR JOHN 253
then opened them again. “I know how you still feel about me,
and I’d love to tell you that I have some secret desire to know
everything you’ve been through since I sent you that awful letter,
but to be honest?” She hesitated. “I don’t know if I really want to
know. All I know is that when you showed up yesterday, I felt . . .
okay. Not great, not good, but not bad, either. And that’s the
thing. For the last six months, all I’ve done is feel bad. I wake up
every day nervous and tense and angry and frustrated and terrifi ed
that I’m going to lose the man I married. That’s all I feel until the
sun goes down,” she went on. “Every single day, all day long, for
the past six months. That’s my life right now, but the hard part
is that from here on in, I know it’s only going to get worse. Now
there’s the added responsibility of trying to fi nd some way to help
my husband. Of trying to fi nd a treatment that might help. Of
trying to save his life.”
She paused and looked closely at me, trying to gauge my
reaction.
I knew there were words to comfort Savannah, but as usual, I
didn’t know what to say. All I knew was that she was still the
woman I’d once fallen in love with, the woman I still loved but
could never have.
“I’m sorry,” she said eventually, sounding spent. “I don’t mean to
put you on the spot.” She gave a fragile smile. “I just wanted you to
know that I’m glad you’re here.”
I focused on the wood grain of the table, trying to keep my feelings
on a tight leash. “Good,” I said.
She wandered toward the table. She added some wine to my
glass, though I’d yet to drink more than that one gulp. “I pour out
my heart and all you do is say, ‘Good’?”
“What do you want me to say?”
Savannah turned away and headed toward the door of the
kitchen. “You could have said that you’re glad you came, too,” she
said in a barely audible voice.
254 Nicholas Sparks
With that, she was gone. I didn’t hear the front door open, so I
surmised that she had retreated to the living room.
Her comment bothered me, but I wasn’t about to follow her.
Things had changed between us, and there was no way they could
be what they once were. I forked lasagna into my mouth with stubborn
defi ance, wondering what she wanted from me. She was the
one who’d sent the letter, she was the one who’d ended it. She was
the one who got married. Were we supposed to pretend that none
of those things had happened?
I fi nished eating and brought both plates to the sink and rinsed
them. Through the rain-splattered window, I saw my car and knew
I should simply leave without looking back. It would be easier that
way for both of us. But when I reached into my pockets for the keys,
I froze. Over the patter of the rain on the roof, I heard a sound from
the living room, a sound that defused my anger and confusion.
Savannah, I realized, was crying.
I tried to ignore the sound, but I couldn’t. Taking my wine, I
crossed into the living room.
Savannah sat on the couch, cupping the glass of wine in her
hands. She looked up as I entered.
Outside, the wind had begun to pick up, and the rain started
coming down even harder. Beyond the living room glass, lightning
fl ashed, followed by the steady rumble of thunder, long and
low.
Taking a seat beside her, I put my glass on the end table and
looked around the room. Atop the fi replace mantel stood photographs
of Savannah and Tim on their wedding day: one where they
were cutting the cake and another taken in the church. She was
beaming, and I found myself wishing that I were the one beside her
in the picture.
“Sorry,” she said. “I know I shouldn’t be crying, but I can’t
help it.”
“It’s understandable,” I murmured. “You’ve got a lot going on.”
DEAR JOHN 255
In the silence, I listened to the sheets of rain batter the windowpanes.
“It’s quite a storm,” I observed, grasping for words that would
fi ll the taut silence.
“Yeah,” she said, barely listening.
“Do you think Alan’s going to be okay?”
She tapped her fi ngers against the glass. “He won’t leave until it
stops raining. He doesn’t like lightning. But it shouldn’t last long.
The wind will push the storm toward the coast. At least, that’s the
way it’s been lately.” She hesitated. “Do you remember that storm
we sat out? When I took you to the house we were building?”
“Of course.”
“I still think about that night. That was the fi rst time I told you
that I loved you. I was remembering that night just the other day. I
was sitting here just like I am now. Tim was in the hospital, Alan
was with him, and while I watched the rain, it all came back. The
memory was so vivid, it felt like it had just happened. And then the
rain stopped and I knew it was time to feed the horses. I was back
in my regular life again, and all at once, it felt like I had just imagined
the whole thing. Like it happened to someone else, someone
I don’t even know anymore.”
She leaned toward me. “What do you remember the most?” she
asked.
“All of it,” I said.
She looked at me beneath her lashes. “Nothing stands out?”
The storm outside made the room feel dark and intimate, and
I felt a shiver of guilty anticipation about where all this might be
leading. I wanted her as much as I’d ever wanted anyone, but in
the back of my mind, I knew Savannah wasn’t mine anymore. I
could feel Tim’s presence all around me, and I knew she wasn’t
really herself.
I took a sip of wine, then set the glass back on the table.
“No.” I kept my voice steady. “Nothing stands out. But that’s why
256 Nicholas Sparks
you always wanted me to look at the moon, right? So that I could
remember all of it?”
What I didn’t say was that I still went out to stare at the moon,
and despite the guilt I was feeling about being here, I wondered
whether she did, too.
“You want to know what I remember most?” she asked.
“When I broke Tim’s nose?”
“No.” She laughed, then turned serious. “I remember the times
we went to church. Do you realize that they’re still the only times
I ever saw you in a tie? You should get dressed up more often. You
looked good.” She seemed to refl ect on that before turning her
eyes to me again.
“Are you seeing anyone?” she asked.
“No.”
She nodded. “I didn’t think so. I fi gured you would have mentioned
it.”
She turned toward the window. In the distance, I could see one
of the horses galloping in the rain.
“I’m going to have to feed them in a little while. I’m sure they’re
wondering where I am already.”
“They’ll be okay,” I assured her.
“Easy for you to say. Trust me—they can get as cranky as people
when they’re hungry.”
“It must be hard handling all this on your own.”
“It is. But what choice do I have? At least our employer’s been
understanding. Tim’s on a leave of absence, and whenever he’s in
the hospital, they let me take however much time I need.” Then,
in a teasing tone, she added, “Just like the army, right?”
“Oh yeah. It’s exactly the same.”
She giggled, then became sober again. “How was it in Iraq?”
I was about to make my usual crack about the sand, but instead
I said, “It’s hard to describe.”
Savannah waited, and I reached for my glass of wine, stalling.
DEAR JOHN 257
Even with her, I wasn’t sure I wanted to go into it. But something
was happening between us, something I wanted and yet didn’t
want. I forced myself to look at Savannah’s ring and imagine the
betrayal she would no doubt feel later. I closed my eyes and started
with the night of the invasion.
I don’t know how long I talked, but it was long enough for the
rain to have ended. With the sun still drifting in its slow descent,
the horizon glowed the colors of a rainbow. Savannah refi lled her
glass. By the time I fi nished, I was entirely spent and knew I’d never
speak of it again.
Savannah had remained quiet as I spoke, asking only the occasional
question to let me know she was listening to everything
I said.
“It’s different from what I imagined,” she remarked.
“Yeah?” I asked.
“When you scan the headlines or read the stories, most of the
time, names of soldiers and cities in Iraq are just words. But to you,
it’s personal . . . it’s real. Maybe too real.”
I had nothing left to add, and I felt her hand reach for mine. Her
touch made something leap inside me. “I wish you’d never had to
go through all that.”
I squeezed her hand and felt her respond in kind. When she
fi nally let go, the sensation of her touch lingered, and like an old
habit rediscovered, I watched her tuck a strand of hair behind her
ear. The sight made me ache.
“It’s strange how fate works,” she said, her voice almost a
whisper. “Did you ever imagine that your life would turn out like
it did?”
“No,” I said.
“I didn’t either,” she said. “When you fi rst went back to Germany,
I just knew that you and I would be married one day. I was more sure
of that than anything in my life.”
I stared into my glass as she went on.
258 Nicholas Sparks
“And then, on your second leave, I was even more sure. Especially
after we made love.”
“Don’t . . .” I shook my head. “Let’s not go there.”
“Why?” she asked. “Do you regret it?”
“No.” I couldn’t bear to look at her. “Of course not. But you’re
married now.”
“But it happened,” she said. “Do you want me to just forget
it?”
“I don’t know,” I said. “Maybe.”
“I can’t,” she said, sounding surprised and hurt. “That was my
fi rst time. I’ll never forget it, and in its own way, it will always be
special to me. What happened between us was beautiful.”
I didn’t trust myself to respond, and after a moment, she seemed
to collect herself. Leaning forward, she asked, “When you found
out that I had married Tim, what did you think?”
I waited to answer, wanting to choose my words with care. “My
fi rst thought was that in a way, it made sense. He’s been in love
with you for years. I knew that from the moment I met him.” I ran
a hand over my face. “After that, I felt . . . confl icted. I was glad
that you picked someone like him, because he’s a nice guy and you
two have a lot in common, but then I was just . . . sad. We didn’t
have that long to go. I would have been out of the army for almost
two years now.”
She pressed her lips together. “I’m sorry,” she murmured.
“I am, too.” I tried to smile. “If you want my honest opinion, I
think you should have waited for me.”
She laughed uncertainly, and I was surprised by the look of longing
on her face. She reached for her glass of wine.
“I’ve been thinking about that, too. Where we would have been,
where we’d be living, what we’d be doing in our lives. Especially
lately. Last night after you left, that’s all I could think about. I know
how terrible that makes me sound, but these past couple of years,
I’ve been trying to convince myself that even if our love was real,
DEAR JOHN 259
it never would have lasted.” Her expression was forlorn. “You really
would have married me, wouldn’t you?”
“In a heartbeat. And I still would if I could.”
The past suddenly seemed to loom over us, overwhelming in its
intensity.
“It was real, wasn’t it?” Her voice had a tremor. “You and me?”
The gray light of dusk was refl ected in her eyes as she waited for
my answer. In the moments that elapsed, I felt the weight of Tim’s
prognosis hanging over both of us. My racing thoughts were morbid
and wrong, but they were there nonetheless. I hated myself for
even thinking about life after Tim, willing the thought away.
Yet I couldn’t. I wanted to take Savannah in my arms, to hold
her, to recapture everything we had lost in our years apart. Instinctively,
I began to lean toward her.
Savannah knew what was coming but didn’t pull away. Not at
fi rst. As my lips neared hers, however, she turned quickly and the
wine she was holding splashed onto both of us.
She jumped to her feet, setting her glass on the table and pulling
her blouse away from her skin.
“I’m sorry,” I said.
“It’s okay,” she said. “I’m going to change, though. I’ve got to get
this soaking. It’s one of my favorites.”
“Okay,” I said.
I watched as she left the living room and went down the hall.
She turned into the bedroom on the right, and when she was
gone, I cursed. I shook my head at my own stupidity, then noticed
the wine on my shirt. I stood and started down the hall, looking
for the bathroom.
Turning a random doorknob, I came face-to-face with myself in
the bathroom mirror. In the refl ected background, I could see
Savannah through the cracked door of the bedroom across the
hall. She was topless with her back to me, and though I tried, I
couldn’t turn away.
She must have sensed me staring at her, for she looked over her
260 Nicholas Sparks
shoulder toward me. I thought she would suddenly close the door
or cover herself, but she didn’t. Instead, she caught my eyes and held
them, willing me to continue watching her. And then, slowly, she
turned around.
We stood there facing each other through the refl ection in the
mirror, with only the narrow hallway separating us. Her lips were
parted slightly, and she lifted her chin a bit; I knew that if I lived
to be a thousand, I would never forget how exquisite she looked
at that moment. I wanted to cross the hallway and go to her, knowing
that she wanted me as much as I wanted her. But I stayed where
I was, frozen by the thought that she would one day hate me for
what we both so obviously wanted.
And Savannah, who knew me better than anyone else, dropped
her eyes as if suddenly coming to the same understanding. She
turned back around just as the front door crashed open and I heard
a loud wail pierce the darkness.
Alan . . .
I turned and rushed to the living room; Alan had already vanished
into the kitchen, and I could hear the cupboard doors being
opened and slammed while he continued to wail, almost as if he
were dying. I stopped, not knowing what to do. A moment later,
Savannah rushed past me, tugging her shirt back into place.
“Alan! I’m coming!” she shouted, her voice frantic. “It’s going to
be okay!”
Alan continued to wail, and the cupboards continued to slam
shut.
“Do you need help?” I called to her.
“No.” She gave a hard shake of her head. “Let me handle this.
It happens sometimes when he gets home from the hospital.”
As she rushed into the kitchen, I could barely hear her beginning
to talk to him. Her voice was almost lost in the clamor, but
I heard the steadiness in it, and moving off to the side, I could see
her standing next to him, trying to calm him. It didn’t seem to
have any effect, and I felt the urge to help, but Savannah remained
DEAR JOHN 261
calm. She continued to talk steadily to him, then placed a hand on
top of his, following along with the slamming.
Finally, after what seemed like forever, the slamming began to
slow and become more rhythmic; from there it slowly faded away.
Alan’s cries followed the same pattern. Savannah’s voice was softer
now, and I could no longer hear distinct words.
I sat on the couch. A few minutes later, I rose and went to the
window. It was dark; the clouds had passed, and above the mountains
was a swirl of stars. Wondering what was going on, I moved to
a spot in the living room that afforded a glimpse into the kitchen.
Savannah and Alan were sitting on the kitchen fl oor. Her back
was leaning against the cupboards, and Alan rested his head on
her chest as she ran a tender hand through his hair. He was blinking
rapidly, as if wired to always be in motion. Savannah’s eyes
gleamed with tears, but I could see her look of concentration, and
I knew she was determined not to let him know how much she
was hurting.
“I love him,” I heard Alan say. Gone was the deep voice from the
hospital; this was the aching plea of a frightened little boy.
“I know, sweetie. I love him, too. I love him so much. I know
you’re scared, and I’m scared, too.”
I could hear from her tone how much she meant it.
“I love him,” Alan repeated.
“He’ll be out of the hospital in a couple of days. The doctors are
doing everything they can.”
“I love him.”
She kissed the top of his head. “He loves you, too, Alan. And so
do I. And I know he’s looking forward to riding the horses with you
again. He told me that. And he’s so proud of you. He tells me all
the time what a good job you do around here.”
“I’m scared.”
“I am, too, sweetie. But the doctors are doing everything they
can.”
“I love him.”
262 Nicholas Sparks
“I know. I love him, too. More than you can ever imagine.”
I continued to watch them, knowing suddenly that I didn’t belong
here. In all the time I stood there, Savannah never looked up,
and I felt haunted by all that we had lost.
I patted my pocket, pulled out my keys, and turned to leave,
feeling tears burning at the back of my eyes. I opened the door,
and despite the loud squeak, I knew that Savannah wouldn’t hear
anything.
I stumbled down the steps, wondering if I’d ever been so tired in
my life. And later, as I drove to my motel and listened to the car
idle as I waited for the stoplights to change, I knew that passersby
would see a man crying, a man whose tears felt as if they would
never stop.
I spent the rest of the evening alone in my motel room. Outside,
I could hear strangers passing by my door, wheeled luggage rolling
behind them. When cars pulled into the lot, my room would be
illuminated momentarily by headlights casting ghostly images
against the walls. People on the go, people moving forward in life.
As I lay on the bed, I was fi lled with envy and wondered whether
I would ever be able to say the same.
I didn’t bother trying to sleep. I thought about Tim, but oddly,
instead of the emaciated fi gure I’d seen in the hospital room, I
saw only the young man I’d met at the beach, the clean-cut
student with an easy smile for everyone. I thought about my dad
and wondered what his fi nal weeks were like. I tried to imagine
the staff listening to him as he talked about coins and prayed
that the director had been right when he told me that my dad
had passed away peacefully in his sleep. I thought about Alan
and the foreign world his mind inhabited. But mostly I thought
about Savannah. I replayed the day we’d spent, and I dwelled
endlessly on the past, trying to escape an emptiness that wouldn’t
go away.
In the morning, I watched the sun come up, a golden marble
DEAR JOHN 263
emerging from the earth. I showered and loaded the few belongings
I’d brought into the room back in the car. At the diner across
the street, I ordered breakfast, but when the plate arrived steaming
before me, I pushed it aside and nursed a cup of coffee, wondering
if Savannah was already up, feeding the horses.
It was nine in the morning when I showed up at the hospital. I
signed in and rode the elevator to the third fl oor; I walked the
same corridor I’d walked the day before. Tim’s door was halfway
open, and I could hear the television.
He saw me and smiled in surprise. “Hey, John,” he said, turning
off the television. “Come in. I was just killing time.”
As I took a seat in the same chair I’d sat in the day before, I
noticed that his color was better. He struggled to sit up higher in
the bed before focusing on me again.
“What brings you here so early?”
“I’m getting ready to head out,” I said. “I’ve got to catch a fl ight
tomorrow back to Germany. You know how it is.”
“Yeah, I know.” He nodded. “Hopefully I’ll be getting out later
today. I had a pretty good night last night.”
“Good,” I said. “I’m glad to hear it.”
I studied him, looking for any sign of suspicion in his gaze, any
inkling of what had nearly happened the night before, but I saw
nothing.
“Why are you really here, John?” he asked.
“I’m not sure,” I confessed. “I just felt like I needed to see you.
And that maybe you wanted to see me, too.”
He nodded and turned toward the window; from his room,
there was nothing to see except a large air-conditioning unit. “You
want to know what the worst thing about all this is?” He didn’t
wait for an answer. “I worry about Alan,” he said. “I know what’s
happening to me. I know the odds aren’t good and that there’s a
good chance I won’t make it. I can accept that. Like I told you
yesterday, I’ve still got my faith, and I know—or at least I hope—
there’s something better waiting for me. And Savannah . . . I know
264 Nicholas Sparks
that if something does happen to me, she’ll be crushed. But you
know what I learned when I lost my parents?”
“That life isn’t fair?”
“Yeah, that, of course. But I also learned that it’s possible to
go on, no matter how impossible it seems, and that in time, the
grief . . . lessens. It may not ever go away completely, but after a
while it’s not overwhelming. That’s what’s going to happen to
Savannah. She’s young and she’s strong, and she’ll be able to move
on. But Alan . . . I don’t know what’s going to happen to him.
Who’s going to take care of him? Where’s he going to live?”
“Savannah will take care of him.”
“I know she would. But is that fair to her? To expect her to
shoulder that responsibility?”
“It won’t matter whether it’s fair. She won’t let anything happen
to him.”
“How? She’s going to have to work—who watches Alan then?
Remember, he’s still young. He’s only nineteen. Do I expect her to
take care of him for the next fi fty years? For me, it was simple. He’s
my brother. But Savannah . . .” He shook his head. “She’s young
and beautiful. Is it fair to expect that she’ll never get married
again?”
“What are you talking about?”
“Would her new husband be willing to take care of Alan?”
When I said nothing to that, he raised his eyebrows. “Would
you?” he added.
I opened my mouth to answer, but no words came out. His expression
softened.
“That’s what I think about when I’m lying here. When I’m
not sick, I mean. Actually, I think about a lot of things. Including
you.”
“Me?”
“You still love her, don’t you?”
I kept my expression steady, but he read me anyway. “It’s okay,”
he said. “I already know. I’ve always known.” He looked almost
DEAR JOHN 265
wistful. “I can still remember Savannah’s face the fi rst time she
talked about you. I’d never seen her like that. I was happy for her
because there was something about you that I trusted right away.
That whole fi rst year you were gone, she missed you so much. It
was like her heart was breaking a little bit every single day. You
were all she could think about. And then she found out you
weren’t coming home and we ended up in Lenoir and my parents
died and . . .” He didn’t fi nish. “You always knew I was in love with
her, too, didn’t you?”
I nodded.
“I thought so.” He cleared his throat. “I’ve loved her since I was
twelve years old. And gradually, she fell in love with me, too.”
“Why are you telling me this?”
“Because,” he said, “it wasn’t the same. I know she loves me,
but she’s never loved me the way she loved you. She never had
that burning passion for me, but we were making a good life together.
She was so happy when we started the ranch . . . and it just
made me feel so good that I could do something like that for her.
Then I got sick, but she’s always here, caring for me the same way
I’d care for her if it was happening to her.” He stopped then,
struggling to fi nd the right words, and I could see the anguish in
his expression.
“Yesterday, when you came in, I saw the way she was looking at
you, and I knew that she still loved you. More than that, I know
she always will. It breaks my heart, but you know what? I’m still
in love with her, and to me that means that I want nothing more
than for her to be happy in life. I want that more than anything.
It’s all I’ve ever wanted for her.”
My throat was so dry that I could barely speak. “What are you
saying?”
“I’m saying don’t forget Savannah if anything happens to me.
And promise that you’ll always treasure her the same way I do.”
“Tim . . .”
266 Nicholas Sparks
“Don’t say anything, John.” He raised a hand, either to stop me
or in farewell. “Just remember what I said, okay?”
When he turned away, I knew our conversation was over.
I stood then and walked quietly out of the room, shutting the
door behind me.
Outside the hospital, I squinted in the harsh morning sunlight. I
could hear birds chirping in the trees, but even though I searched
for them, they remained hidden from me.
The parking lot was half full. Here and there, I could see
people walking to the entrance or back to their cars. All looked
as weary as I felt, as if the optimism they showed to loved ones
in the hospital vanished the moment they were alone. I knew
that miracles were always possible no matter how sick a person
might be, and that women in the maternity ward were feeling
joy as they held their newborns in their arms, but I sensed that,
like me, most of the hospital visitors were barely holding it
together.
I sat on the bench out front, wondering why I’d come and wishing
that I hadn’t. I replayed my conversation with Tim over and
over, and the image of his anguish made me close my eyes. For the
fi rst time in years, my love for Savannah felt somehow . . . wrong.
Love should bring joy, it should grant a person peace, but here and
now, it was bringing only pain. To Tim, to Savannah, even to me.
I hadn’t come to tempt Savannah or ruin her marriage . . . or had
I? I wasn’t sure I was quite as noble as I thought I was, and the
realization left me feeling as empty as a rusted paint can.
I removed the photograph of Savannah from my wallet. It was
creased and worn. As I stared at her face, I found myself wondering
what the coming year would bring. I didn’t know whether Tim
would live or die, and I didn’t want to think about it. I knew that
no matter what happened, the relationship between Savannah
and me would never be what it once was. We’d met at a carefree
DEAR JOHN 267
time, a moment full of promise; in its place now were the harsh
lessons of the real world.
I rubbed my temples, struck by the thought that Tim knew what
had almost happened between Savannah and me last night, that
maybe he’d even expected it. His words made that clear, as did his
request that I promise to love her with the devotion he felt. I knew
exactly what he was suggesting that I do if he died, but somehow
his permission made me feel even worse.
I fi nally stood and began the slow walk to my car. I wasn’t sure
where I wanted to go, other than that I needed to get as far away
from the hospital as I could. I needed to leave Lenoir, if only to
give myself a chance to think. I dug my hands into my pockets and
fi shed out my keys.
It was only when I got close to my car that I realized Savannah’s
truck was parked next to mine. Savannah was sitting in the front
seat, and when she saw me coming, she opened the door and got
out. She waited for me, smoothing her blouse as I drew near.
I stopped a few feet away.
“John,” she said, “you left without saying good-bye last night.”
“I know.”
She nodded slightly. We both understood the reason.
“How did you know I was here?”
“I didn’t,” she said. “I went by the motel and they told me you’d
checked out. When I came here, I saw your car and decided to
wait for you. Did you see Tim?”
“Yeah. He’s doing better. He thinks he’ll be getting out of the
hospital later today.”
“That’s good news,” she said. She motioned to my car. “Are you
leaving town?”
“Gotta get back. My leave’s up.”
She crossed her arms. “Were you going to come say good-bye?”
“I don’t know,” I admitted. “I hadn’t thought that far ahead.”
I saw a fl ash of hurt and disappointment on her face. “What did
you and Tim talk about?”
268 Nicholas Sparks
I looked over my shoulder at the hospital, then back at her.
“You should probably ask him that question.”
Her mouth formed a tight line, and her body seemed to stiffen.
“So this is good-bye?”
I heard a car honk on the road out front and saw a number of
cars suddenly slow. The driver of a red Toyota veered into the
other lane, doing his best to get around the traffi c. As I watched,
I knew I was stalling and that she deserved an answer.
“Yes,” I said, slowly turning back to her. “I think it is.”
Her knuckles stood out white against her arms. “Can I write
to you?”
I forced myself not to look away, wishing again that the cards
had fallen differently for us. “I’m not so sure that’s a good idea.”
“I don’t understand.”
“Yes, you do,” I said. “You’re married to Tim, not me.” I let that
sink in while gathering my strength for what I wanted to say next.
“He’s a good man, Savannah. A better man than me, that’s for
sure, and I’m glad you married him. As much as I love you, I’m
not willing to break up a marriage for it. And deep down, I don’t
think you are, either. Even if you love me, you love him, too. It
took me a little while to realize that, but I’m sure of it.”
Left unspoken was Tim’s uncertain future, and I could see her
eyes beginning to fi ll with tears.
“Will we ever see each other again?”
“I don’t know.” The words burned in my throat. “But I’m hoping
we don’t.”
“How can you say that?” she asked, her voice beginning to
crack.
“Because it means that Tim’s going to be okay. And I have a
feeling that it’s all going to turn out the way it should.”
“You can’t say that! You can’t promise that!”
“No,” I said, “I can’t.”
“Then why does it have to end now? Like this?”
A tear spilled down her face, and despite the fact that I knew I
DEAR JOHN 269
270 Nicholas Sparks
should simply walk away, I took a step toward her. When I was
close, I gently wiped it away. In her eyes I could see fear and sadness,
anger and betrayal. But most of all, I saw them pleading with
me to change my mind.
I swallowed hard.
“You’re married to Tim, and your husband needs you. All of you.
There’s no room for me, and we both know there shouldn’t be.”
As more tears started fl owing down her face, I felt my own eyes
fi ll up. I leaned in and kissed Savannah gently on the lips, then
took her in my arms and held her tight.
“I love you, Savannah, and I always will,” I breathed. “You’re
the best thing that’s ever happened to me. You were my best friend
and my lover, and I don’t regret a single moment of it. You made
me feel alive again, and most of all, you gave me my father. I’ll
never forget you for that. You’re always going to be the very best
part of me. I’m sorry it has to be this way, but I have to leave, and
you have to see your husband.”
As I spoke, I could feel her shaking with sobs, and I continued
to hold her for a long time afterward. When we fi nally separated,
I knew that it would be the last time I ever held her.
I backed away, my eyes holding Savannah’s.
“I love you, too, John,” she said.
“Good-bye.” I raised a hand.
And with that, she wiped her face and began walking toward
the hospital.
Saying good-bye was the hardest thing I ever had to do. Part of
me wanted to turn the car around and race back to the hospital,
to tell her that I would always be there for her, to confi de in her
the things Tim had said to me. But I didn’t.
On the way out of town, I stopped at a small convenience store.
I needed gas and fi lled the tank; inside, I bought a bottle of water.
As I approached the counter, I saw a jar that the owner had set
out to collect money for Tim, and I stared at it. It was fi lled with
DEAR JOHN 271
change and dollar bills; on the label, it listed the name of an account
at a local bank. I asked for a few dollars in quarters, and the
man behind the counter obliged.
I was numb as I made my way back to the car. I opened the door
and began fi shing through the documents that the lawyer had
given me, looking also for a pencil. I found what I needed, then
went to the pay phone. It was located near the road, with cars
roaring past. I dialed information and had to press the receiver
hard against my ear to hear the computerized voice give me the
number I’d requested. I scrawled it on the documents, then hung
up. I dropped some coins into the slot, dialed the long-distance
number, and heard another computer-generated voice request
even more money. I dropped in a few more coins. Soon I could
hear the phone ringing.
When it was answered, I told the man who I was and asked if
he remembered me.
“Of course I do, John. How are you?”
“Fine, thanks. My dad passed away.”
There was a short pause. “I’m sorry to hear that,” he said. “You
doing okay?”
“I don’t know,” I said.
“Is there anything I can do?”
I closed my eyes, thinking of Savannah and Tim and hoping
somehow that my dad would forgive me for what I was about to
do. “Yes,” I said to the coin dealer, “actually there is. I want to sell
my dad’s coin collection, and I need the money as quickly as you
can get it to me.”

Lenoir, 2006
W
hat does true love really mean? I think about the question again as I sit on the hillside and
watch Savannah moving among the horses. For a moment, I fl ash
to the night I showed up at the ranch to fi nd her . . . but that
visit, a year ago now, feels more and more like a dream to me.
I sold the coins for less than they were worth, and piece by
piece, I knew that the remains of my dad’s collection would be
distributed to people who would never care as much about them
as he did. In the end, I saved only the buffalo head nickel, for I
simply couldn’t bear to give it up. Aside from the photo, it’s all
I have left of my dad, and I always carry it with me. It’s a talisman
of sorts, one that carries with it all my memories of my dad;
every now and then, I remove it from my pocket and stare at it.
I’ll run my fi ngers over the plastic case that holds the coin, and
all at once, I can see my dad reading the Greysheet in his offi ce
or smell the bacon as it sizzles in the kitchen. I fi nd that it makes
me smile, and for a moment, I feel that I’m no longer alone.
But I am, and part of me knows that I always will be. I hold
this thought as I search out the fi gures of Savannah and Tim in
the distance, holding hands as they walk to the house; I see them
Epilogue
....Z....
274 Nicholas Sparks
touch in a way that speaks of their genuine affection for each
other. They look good as a couple, I have to admit. When Tim calls
to Alan, he joins them, and the three of them head inside. I wonder
for a moment what they’re talking about as they enter, for I’m
curious about the little details of their lives, but I’m fully aware
that it’s none of my business. I have heard, however, that Tim is
no longer receiving treatment and that most people in town expect
him to recover.
I learned this through the local lawyer I hired on my last visit
to Lenoir. I’d entered his offi ce with a cashier’s check and asked
him to deposit it in the account that had been set up for Tim’s
treatment. I knew all about attorney-client privilege, and I knew
he would say nothing to anyone in town. It was important not to
let Savannah know what I’d done. In any marriage, there’s room
for only two people.
I did, however, ask the lawyer to keep me informed, and during
the past year, I spoke with him several times from Germany.
He told me that when he contacted Savannah to tell her that a
client wanted to make an anonymous donation—but wanted to
be kept informed of Tim’s progress—she broke down and cried
when he told her the amount. He told me that within a week,
she’d brought Tim to MD Anderson and learned that Tim was an
ideal candidate for the vaccine trial MD Anderson planned to
start in November. He told me that prior to joining the clinical
trial, Tim was treated with biochemotherapy and adjuvant
therapy and that the doctors were hopeful the treatments would
kill the cancerous cells massing in his lungs. A couple of
months ago, the lawyer called to tell me that the treatment had
been more successful than even the doctors hoped and that now
Tim was technically in remission.
It didn’t guarantee that he would live to an old age, but it
did guarantee him a fi ghting chance, and that’s all I wanted for
both of them. I wanted them to be happy. I wanted her to be
happy. And from what I had witnessed today, they were. I’d
DEAR JOHN 275
come because I needed to know that I’d made the right choice
in selling the coins for Tim’s treatment, that I’d done the right
thing in never contacting her again, and from where I sat, I
knew that I had.
I sold the collection because I fi nally understood what true
love really meant. Tim had told me—and shown me—that love
meant that you care for another person’s happiness more than
your own, no matter how painful the choices you face might
be. I’d left Tim’s hospital room knowing that he’d been right.
But doing the right thing wasn’t easy. These days, I lead my
life feeling that something is missing that I somehow need to
make my life complete. I know that my feeling about Savannah
will never change, and I know I will always wonder about the
choice I made.
And sometimes, despite myself, I wonder if Savannah feels
the same way. Which of course explains the other reason I came
to Lenoir.
I stare at the ranch as evening settles in. It’s the fi rst night of
the full moon, and for me, the memories will come. They always
do. I hold my breath as the moon begins its slow rise over the
mountain, its milky glow edging just over the horizon. The trees
turn liquid silver, and though I want to return to those bittersweet
memories, I turn away and look at the ranch again.
For a long time, I wait in vain. The moon continues its slow arc
across the sky, and one by one, the lights in the house wink out.
I fi nd myself focusing anxiously on the front door, hoping for the
impossible. I know that she won’t appear, but I still can’t force
myself to leave. I breathe in slowly, as if hoping to draw her out.
And when I see her fi nally emerge from the house, I feel a
strange tingling in my spine, one I’ve never experienced before.
She pauses on the steps, and I watch as she turns and seems
to stare in my direction. I freeze for no reason—I know she can’t
possibly see me. From my perch, I watch as Savannah closes
276 Nicholas Sparks
the door quietly behind her. She slowly descends the steps and
wanders to the center of the yard.
She pauses then and crosses her arms, glancing over her
shoulder to make sure no one has followed her. Finally, she
seems to relax. And then I feel as if I’m witnessing a miracle,
as ever so slowly she raises her face toward the moon. I watch
her drink in the sight, sensing the fl ood of memories she’s unleashed
and wanting nothing more than to let her know I’m here.
But instead I stay where I am and stare up at the moon as well.
And for the briefest instant, it almost feels like we’re together
again.


THE
NOTEBOOK
i THE NOTEBOOK
Nicholas Sparks
VVNER BOOKS
A Time Warner Company
ii
This book is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places and incidents are either
the product of the author's imagination or are used fictitiously, and any resemblance
to actual persons, living or dead, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.
Copyright ┍996 by Nicholas Sparks All rights reserved.
Warner Books, Inc., 1271 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020
A
Time Warner Company
Printed in the United States of America
First Printing: October 1996
10 9 8 7 6 $ 4 3
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Sparks, Nicholas.
The notebook / Nicholas Sparks.
p. cm.
ISBN 0-446-52080-2
1. Man-woman relatinnships--North Carolina--Fiction. 2. Oral reading--Fiction. 3.
Aged--Fiction. I. Title. PS3569.P363N68 1996
813'.54--dc2096-33815CIP
Book design and composition by L & G McRee
iii This book is dedicated with love to Cathy, my wife and my friend.
iv Acknowledgments
This story is what it is today because of two special people, and I would like to
thank them for everything they've done.
To Theresa Park, the agent who plucked me from obscurity. Thank you for your kin&ess,
your patience, and the many hours you have spent working with me. I will be forever
grateful for everything you've done.
To Jamie Raab, my editor. Thank you for your wisdom, your humor, and your good-hearted
nature. You made this a wonderful experience for me, and I'm glad to call you my
friend.
v THE NOTEBOOK
1 Who am I? And how, I wonder, will this story end?
The sun has come up and I am sitting by a window that is foggy with the breath of
a life,,,. gone by. I'm a sight this morning: two shirts,
heavy pants, a scarf wrapped twice around my neck and tucked into a thick sweater
knitted by my daughter thirty birthdays ago. The thermostat in my room is set as
high as it will go, and a smaller space heater sits directly behind me. It clicks
and groans and spews hot air like a fairy-tale dragon, and still my body shivers
with a cold that will never go away, a cold that has been eighty years in the making.
Eighty years, I think sometimes, and despite my own acceptance of my age, it still
amazes me that I haven't been warm since George Bush was president.
2
I wonder if this is how it is for everyone my age.
My life? It isn't easy to explain. It has not been the rip-roaring spectacular I
fancied it would be, but neither have I burrowed around with the gophers. I suppose
it has most resembled a blue-chip stock: fairly stable, more ups than downs, and
gradually trending upward over time. A good buy, a lucky buy, and I've learned that
not everyone can say this about his life. But do not be misled. I am nothing special;
of this I am sure. I am a common man with common thoughts, and I've led a common
life. There are no monuments dedicated to me and my name will soon be forgotten,
but I've loved another with all my heart and soul, and to me, this has always been
enough.
The romantics would call this a love story, the cynics would call it a tragedy. In
my mind it's a little bit of both, and no matter how you choose to view it in the
end, it does not change the fact that it involves a great deal of my life and the
path I've chosen to follow. I have no complaints about my path and the places it
has taken me; enough complaints to fill a circus tent about other things, maybe,
but the path I've chosen has always been the right one, and I wouldn't have had it
any other way.
Time, unfortunately, doesn't make it easy to stay on course. The path is straight
as ever, but now it is strewn with the rocks and gravel that
3
accumulate over a lifetime. Until three years ago it would have been easy to ignore,
but it's impossible now. There is a sickness rolling through my body; I'm neither
strong nor healthy, and my days are spent like an old party balloon: listless, spongy,
and growing softer over time.
I cough, and through squinted eyes I check my watch. I realize it is time to go.
I stand from my seat by the window and shuffle across the room, stopping at the desk
to pick up the notebook I have read a hundred times. I do not glance through it.
Instead I slip it beneath my arm and continue on my way to the place I must go.
I walk on tiled floors, white in color and speckled with gray. Like my hair and the
hair of most people here, though I'm the only one in the hallway this morning. They
are in their rooms, alone except for television, but they, like me, are used to it.
A person can get used to anything, if given enough time.
I hear the muffled sounds of crying in 'e distance and know exactly who is making
those sounds. Then the nurses see me and we smile at each other and exchange greetings.
They are my friends and we talk often, but I am sure they wonder about me and the
things that I go through every day. I listen as they begin to whisper among themselves
as I pass. "There he goes again," I hear, "I hope it turns out well." But they say
nothing directly to me about it. I'm sure they think it would hurt me to talk about
it so
4
early in the morning, and knowing myself as I do, I think they're probably right.
A minute later, I reach the room. The door has been propped open for me, as it usually
is. There are two others in the room, and they too smile at me as I enter. "Good
morning," they say with cheery voices, and I take a moment to ask about the kids
and the schools and upcoming vacations. We talk above the crying for a minute or
so. They do not seem to notice; they have become numb to it, but then again, so have
I.
Afterward I sit in the chair that has come to be shaped like me. They are finishing
up now; her clothes are on, but still she is crying. It will become quieter after
they leave, I know. The excitement of the morning always upsets her, and today is
no exception. Finally the shade is opened and the nurses walk out. Both of them touch
me and smile as they walk by. I wonder what this means.
I sit for just a second and stare at her, but she doesn't return the look. I understand,
for she doesn't know who I am. I'm a stranger to her. Then, turning away, I bow my
head and pray silently for the strength I know I will need. I have always been a
firm believer in God and the power of prayer, though to be honest, my faith has made
for a list of questions I definitely want answered after I'm gone.
Ready now. On go the glasses, out of my pocket comes a magnifier. I put it on the
table for
5
a moment while I open the notebook. It takes two licks on my gnarled finger to get
the well-worn cover open to the first page. Then I put the magnifier in place.
There is always a moment right before 1 begin to read the story when my mind churns,
and I wonder, Will it happen today? I don't know, for I never know beforehand, and
deep down it really doesn't matter. It's the possibility that keeps me going, not
the guarantee, a sort of wager on my part. And though you may call me a dreamer or
fool or any other thing, I believe that anything is possible.
I realize the odds, and science, are against me. But science is not the total answer;
this ! know, this I have learned in my lifetime. And that leaves me with the belief
that miracles, no matter how inexplicable or unbelievable, are real and can occur
without regard to the natural order of things. So once again, just as I do every
day, I begin to read the notebook aloud, so that she can hear it, in the hope that
the miracle that has come to dominate my life will once again prevail. And maybe,
just maybe, it will.
6 osts
It was early October 1946, and Noah Calhoun watched the fading sun sink lower from
the wraparound porch of his plantation-style home. He liked to sit here in the evenings,
especially after working hard all day, and let his thoughts wander without conscious
direction. It was how he relaxed, a routine he'd learned from his father.
He especially liked to look at the trees and their reflections in the river. North
.Carolina trees are beautiful in deep autumn: greens, yellows, reds, oranges, every
shade in between. Their dazzling colors glow with the sun, and for the hundredth
time, Noah Calhoun wondered if the original owners of the house had spent their evenings
thinking the same things.
The house was built in 1772, making it one of
7
the oldest, as well as largest, homes in New Bern. Originally it was the main house
on a working plantation, and he had bought it right after the war ended and had spent
the last eleven months and a small fortune repairing it. The reporter from the Raleigh
paper had done an article on it a few weeks ago and said it was one of the finest
restorations he'd ever seen. At least the house was. The remaining property was another
story, and that was where he'd spent most of the day.
The home sat on twelve acres adjacent to Brices Creek, and he'd worked on the wooden
fence that lined the other three sides of the property, checking for dry rot or termites,
replacing posts when he had to. He still had more work to do on it, especially on
the west side, and as he'd put the tools away earlier he'd made a mental note to
call and have some more lumber delivered. He'd gone into the house, drunk a glass
of sweet tea, then showered. He always showered at the end of the day, the water
washing away both dirt and fatigue.'
Afterward he'd combed his hair back, put on some faded jeans and a long-sleeved blue
shirt, poured himself another glass of sweet tea, and gone to the porch, where he
now sat, where he sat every day at this time.
He stretched his arms above his head, then out to the sides, rolling his shoulders
as he completed the routine. He felt good and clean now, fresh. His muscles were
tired and he knew he'd
8
be a little sore tomorrow, but he was pleased that he had accomplished most of what
he had wanted to do.
Noah reached for his guitar, remembering his father as he did so, thinking how much
he missed him. He strummed once, adjusted the tension on two strings, then strummed
again. This time it sounded about right, and he began to play. Soft music, quiet
music. He hummed for a little while at first, then began to sing as night came down
around him. He played and sang until the sun was gone and the sky was black.
It was a little after seven when he quit, and he settled back into his chair and
began to rock. By habit, he looked upward and saw Orion and the Big Dipper, Gemini
and the Pole Star, twinkling in the autumn sky.
He started to run the numbers in his head, then stopped. He knew he'd spent almost
his entire savings on the house and would have to find a job again soon, but he pushed
the thought away and decided to enjoy the remaining months of restoration without
worrying about it. It would work out for him, he knew; it always did. Besides, thinking
about money usually bored him. Early on, he'd learned to enjoy simple things, things
that couldn't be bought, and he had a hard time understanding people who felt otherwise.
It was another trait he got from his father.
Clem, his hound dog, came up to him then
9
and nuzzled his hand before lying down at his feet. "Hey, girl, how're you doing?"
he asked as he patted her head, and she whined softly, her soft round eyes peering
upward. A car accident had taken her leg, but she still moved well enough and kept
him company on quiet nights like these.
He was thirty-one now, not too old, but old enough to be lonely. He hadn't dated
since he'd been back here, hadn't met anyone who remotely interested him. It was
his own fault, he knew. There was something that kept a distance between him and
any woman who started to get close, something he wasn't sure he could change even
if he tried. And sometimes in the moments right before sleep came, he wondered if
he was destined to be alone forever.
The evening passed, staying warm, nice. Noah listened to the crickets and the rustling
leaves, thinking that the sound of nature was more real and aroused more emotion
than things like cars and planes. Natural things gave back more than they took, and
their sounds always brought him back to the way man was supposed to be. There were
times during the war, especially after a major engagement, when he had often thought
about these simple sounds. "It'll keep you from going crazy," his father had told
him the day he'd shipped out. "It's God's music and it'll take you home."
He finished his tea, went inside, found a book,
10
then turned on the porch light on his way back out. After sitting down again, he
looked at the book. It was old, the cover was torn, and the pages were stained with
mud and water. It was
Leaves of Grass
by Walt Whitman, and he had carried it with him throughout the war. It had even taken
a bullet for him
once.
He rubbed the cover, dusting it off just a little. Then he let the book open randomly
and read the words in front of him:
This is thy hour O Soul, thy free flight
into the wordless,
Away from books, away from art, the day
erased, the lesson done,
Thee fully forth emerging, silent, gazing,
pondering the themes thou lovest best, Night, sleep, death and the stars.
He smiled to himself. For some reason Whitman always reminded him of New Bern, and
he was glad he'd come back. Though he'd been away for fourteen years, this was home
and he knew a lot of people here, most of them from his youth. It wasn't surprising.
Like so many southern towns, the people who lived here never changed, they just grew
a bit older.
His best friend these days was Gus, a seventy-year-old black man who lived down the
road. They had met a couple of weeks after Noah bought the house, when Gus had shown
up with
11
some homemade liquor and Brunswick stew, and the two had spent their first evening
together getting drunk and telling stories.
Now Gus would show up a couple of nights a week, usually around eight. With four
kids and eleven grandchildren in the house, he needed to get out of the house now
and then, and Noah couldn't blame him. Usually Gus would bring his harmonica, and
after talking for a little while, they'd play a few songs together. Sometimes they
played for hours.
He'd come to regard Gus as family. There really wasn't anyone else, at least not
since his father died last year. He was an only child; his mother had died of influenza
when he was two, and though he had wanted to at one time, he had never married.
But he had been in love once, that he knew. Once and only once, and a long time ago.
And it had changed him forever. Perfect love did that to a person, and this had been
perfect.
Coastal clouds slowly began to roll across the evening sky, turning silver with the
reflection of the moon. As they thickened, he leaned his head back and rested it
against the rocking chair. His legs moved automatically, keeping a steady rhythm,
and as he did most evenings, he felt his mind drifting back to a warm evening like
this fourteen years ago.
It was just after graduation 1932, the opening night of the Neuse River Festival.
The town was
12
out in full, enjoying barbecue and games of chance. It was humid that night--for
some reason he remembered that clearly. He arrived alone, and as he strolled through
the crowd, looking for friends, he saw Fin and Sarah, two people he'd grown up with,
talking to a girl he'd never seen before. She was pretty, he remembered thinking,
and when he finally joined them, she looked his way with a pair of hazy eyes that
kept on coming. "Hi," she'd said simply as she offered her hand, "Finley's told me
a lot about
yo12."
An ordinary beginning, something that would have been forgotten had it been anyone
but her. But as he shook her hand and met those striking emerald eyes, he knew before
he'd taken his next breath that she was the one he could spend the rest of his life
looking for but never find again. She seemed that good, that perfect, while a summer
wind blew through the trees.
From there, it went like a tornado wind. Fin told him she was spending the summer
in New Bern with her family because her father worked for R. J. Reynolds, and though
he only nodded, the way she was looking at him made his silence seem okay. Fin laughed
then, because he knew what was happening, and Sarah suggested they get some cherry
Cokes, and the four of them stayed at the festival until the crowds were thin and
everything closed up for the night.
They met the following day, and the day after
13
that, and they soon became inseparable. Every morning but Sunday when he had to go
to church, he would finish his chores as quickly as possible, then make a straight
line to Fort Totten Park, where she'd be waiting for him. Because she was a newcomer
and hadn't spent time in a small town before, they spent their days doing things
that were completely new to her. He taught her how to bait a line and fish the shallows
for largemouth bass and took her exploring through the backwoods of the Croatan Forest.
They rode in canoes and watched summer thunderstorms, and to him it seemed as though
they'd always known each other.
But he learned things as well. At the town dance in the tobacco barn, it was she
who taught him how to waltz and do the Charleston, and though they stumbled through
the first few songs, her patience with him eventually paid off, and they danced together
until the music ended. He walked her home afterward, and when they paused on the
porch after saying good night, he kissed her for the first time and wondered why
he had waited as long as he had. Later in the summer he brought her to this house,
looked past the decay, and told her that one day he was going to own it and fix it
up. They spent hours together talking about their dreams--his of seeing the world,
hers of being an artist--and on a humid night in August, they both lost their virginity.
When she left three weeks later, she took
14
a piece of him and the rest of summer with her. He watched her leave town on an early
rainy morning, watched through eyes that hadn't slept the night before, then went
home and packed a bag. He spent the next week alone on Harkers Island.
Noah ran his hands through his hair and checked his watch. Eight-twelve. He got up
and walked to the front of the house and looked up the road. Gus wasn't in sight,
and Noah figured he wouldn't be coming. He went back to his rocker and sat again.
He remembered talking to Gus about her. The first time he mentioned her, Gus started
to shake his head and laugh. "So that's the ghost you been running from." When asked
what he meant, Gus said, "You know, the ghost, the memory. I been watchin' you, workin'
day and night, slavin' so hard you barely have time to catch your breath. People
do that for three reasons. Either they crazy, or stupid, or tryin' to forget. And
with you, I knew you was tryin' to forget. I just didn't know what."
He thought about what Gus had said. Gus was right, of course. New Bern was haunted
now. Haunted by the ghost of her memory. He saw her in Fort Totten Park, their place,
every time he walked by. Either sitting on the bench or standing by the gate, always
smiling, blond hair softly touching her shoulders, her eyes the color of emeralds.
When he sat on the porch at night
15
with his guitar, he saw her beside him, listening quietly as he played the music
of his childhood.
He felt the same when he went to Gaston's Drug Store, or to the Masonic theater,
or even when he strolled downtown. Everywhere he looked, he saw her image, saw things
that brought her back to life.
It was odd, he knew that. He had grown up in New Bern. Spent his first seventeen
years here. But when he thought about New Bern, he seemed to remember only the last
summer, the summer they were together. Other memories were simply fragments, pieces
here and there of growing up, and few, if any, evoked any feeling.
He had told Gus about it one night, and not only had Gus understood, but he had been
the first to explain why. He said simply, "My daddy used to tell me that the first
time you fall in love, it changes your life forever, and no matter how hard you try,
the feelin' never goes away. This girl you been tellin' me about was your first love.
And no matter what you do, she'll stay with you forever."
Noah shook his head, and when her image began to fade, he returned to Whitman. He
read for an hour, looking up every now and then to see raccoons and possums scurrying
near the creek. At nine-thirty he closed the book, went upstairs to the bedroom,
and wrote in his journal, including both personal observations and the work he'd
accomplished on the house. Forty
16
minutes later, he was sleeping. Clem wandered up the stairs, sniffed him as he slept,
and then paced in circles before finally curling up at the foot of his bed.
Earlier that evening and a hundred miles away, she sat alone on the porch swing of
her parents' home, one leg crossed beneath her. The seat had been slightly damp when
she sat down; rain had fallen earlier, hard and stinging, but the clouds were fading
now and she looked past them, toward the stars, wondering if she'd made the right
decision. She'd struggled with it for days--and had struggled some more this evening--but
in the end, she knew she would never forgive herself if she let the opportunity slip
away.
Lon didn't know the real reason she left the following morning. The week before,
she'd hinted to him that she might want to visit some antique shops near the coast.
"It's just a couple of days," she said, "and besides, I need a break from planning
the wedding." She felt bad about the lie but knew there was no way she could tell
him the truth. Her leaving had nothing to do with him, and it wouldn't be fair of
her to ask him to understand.
It was an easy drive from Raleigh, slightly more than two hours, and she arrived
a little before eleven. She checked into a small inn downtown, went to her room,
and unpacked her
19
suitcase, hanging her dresses in the closet and putting everything else in the drawers.
She had a quick lunch, asked the waitress for directions to the nearest antique stores,
then spent the next few hours shopping. By four-thirty she was back in her room.
She sat on the edge of the bed, picked up the phone, and called Lon. He couldn't
speak long, he was due in court, but before they hung up she gave him the phone number
where she was staying and promised to call the following day. Good, she thought while
hanging up the phone. Routine conversation, nothing out of the ordinary. Nothing
to make him suspicious.
She'd known him almost four years now; it was 1942 when they met, the world at war
and America one year in. Everyone was doing their part, and she was volunteering
at the hospital downtown. She was both needed and appreciated there, but it was more
difficult than she'd expected. The first waves of wounded young soldiers were coming
home, and she spent her days with broken men and shattered bodies. When Lon, with
all his easy charm, introduced himself at a Christmas party, she saw in him exactly
what she needed: someone with confidence about the future and a sense of humor that
drove all her fears away.
He was handsome, intelligent, and driven, a successful lawyer eight years older than
she, and he pursued his job with passion, not only win-
20
began to shave her legs. As she did, she thought about her parents and what they
would think of her behavior. No doubt they would disapprove, especially her mother.
Her mother had never really accepted what had happened the summer they'd spent here
and wouldn't accept it now, no matter what reason she gave.
She soaked a while longer in the tub before finally getting out and toweling off.
She went to the closet and looked for a dress, finally choosing a long yellow one
that dipped slightly in the front, the kind of dress that was common in the South.
She slipped it on and looked in the mirror, turning from side to side. It fit her
well and made her look feminine, but she eventually decided against it and put it
back on the hanger.
Instead she found a more casual, less revealing dress and put that on. Light blue
with a touch of lace, it buttoned up the front, and though it didn't look quite as
nice as the first one, it conveyed an image she thought would be more appropriate.
She wore little makeup, just a touch of eye shadow and mascara to accent her eyes.
Perfume next, not too much. She found a pair of small-hooped earrings, put those
on, then slipped on the tan, low-heeled sandals she had been wearing earlier. She
brushed her blond hair, pinned it up, and looked in the mirror. No, it was too much,
she thought, and she let it back down. Better.
When she was finished she stepped back and
21
evaluated herself. She looked good: not too dressy, not too casual. She didn't want
to overdo it. After all, she didn't know what to expect. It had been a long time--probably
too long--and many different things could have happened, even things she didn't want
to consider.
She looked down and saw her hands were shaking, and she laughed to herself. It was
strange; she wasn't normally this nervous. Like Lon, she had always been confident,
even as a child. She remembered that it had been a problem at times, especially when
she dated, because it had intimidated most of the boys her age.
She found her pocketbook and car keys, then picked up the room key. She turned it
over in her hand a couple of times, thinking, You've come this far, don't give up
now, and almost left then, but instead sat on the bed again. She checked her watch.
Almost six o'clock. She knew she had to leave in a few minutes--she didn't want to
arrive after dark, but she needed a little more time.
"Damn," she whispered, "what am I doing here? I shouldn't be here. There's no reason
for it," but once she said it she knew it wasn't true. There was something here.
If nothing else, she would have her answer.
She opened her pocketbook and thumbed through it until she came to a folded-up piece
of newspaper. After taking it out slowly, almost reverently, being careful not to
rip it, she unfolded it and stared at it for a while. "This is why," she
22
finally said to herself, "this is what it's all about."
Noah got up at five and kayaked for an hour up Brices Creek, as he usually did. When
he finished, he changed into his work clothes, warmed some biscuits from the day
before, grabbed a couple of apples, and washed his breakfast down with two cups of
coffee.
He worked on the fencing again, repairing most of the posts that needed it. It was
Indian summer, the temperature over eighty degrees, and by lunchtime he was hot and
tired and glad for the break.
He ate at the creek because the mullets were jumping. He liked to watch them jump
three or four times and glide through the air before vanishing into the brackish
water. For some reason he had always been pleased by the fact that their instinct
hadn't changed for thousands, maybe tens of thousands, of years.
Sometimes he wondered if man's instincts had changed in that time and always concluded
that they hadn't. At least in the basic, most primal ways. As far as he could tell,
man had always been aggressive, always striving to dominate, trying to control the
world and everything in it. The war in Europe and Japan proved that.
He quit working a little after three and walked to a small shed that sat near his
dock. He went in, found his fishing pole, a couple of lures, and
23
some live crickets he kept on hand, then walked out to the dock, baited his hook,
and cast his line.
Fishing always made him reflect on his life, and he did it now. After his mother
died, he could remember spending his days in a dozen different homes, and for one
reason or another, he stuttered badly as a child and was teased for it. He began
to speak less and less, and by the age of five, he wouldn't speak at all. When he
started classes, his teachers thought he was retarded and recommended that he be
pulled out of school.
Instead, his father took matters into his own hands. He kept him in school and afterward
made him come to the lumberyard, where he worked, to haul and stack wood. "It's good
that we spend some time together," he would say as they worked side by side, "just
like my daddy
and I did."
During their time talk about birds and together, his father would animals or tell
stories and
legends common to North Carolina. Within a few months Noah was speaking again, though
not well, and his father decided to teach him to read with books of poetry. "Learn
to read this aloud and you'll be able to say anything you want to." His father had
been right again, and by the following year, Noah had lost his stutter. But he continued
to go to the lumberyard every day simply because his father was there, and in
24
the evenings he would read the works of Whitman and Tennyson aloud as his father
rocked beside him. He had been reading poetry ever since.
When he got a little older, he spent most of his weekends and vacations alone. He
explored the Croatan Forest in his first canoe, following Brices Creek for twenty
miles until he could go no farther, then hiked the remaining miles to the coast.
Camping and exploring became his passion, and he spent hours in the forest, sitting
beneath blackjack oak trees, whistling quietly, and playing his guitar for beavers
and geese and wild blue herons. Poets knew that isolation in nature, far from people
and things man-made, was good for the soul, and he'd always identified with poets.
Although he was quiet, years of heavy lifting at the lumberyard helped him excel
in sports, and his athletic success led to popularity. He enjoyed the football games
and track meets, and though most of his teammates spent their free time together
as well, he rarely joined them. An occasional person found him arrogant; most simply
figured he had grown up a bit faster than everyone else. He had a few girlfriends
in school, but none had ever made an impression on him.
Except for one. And she came after graduation. Allie. His Allie.
He remembered talking to Fin about Allie after they'd left the festival that first
night, and
25
Fin had laughed. Then he'd made two predictions: first, that they would fall in love,
and second, that it wouldn't work out.
There was a slight tug at his line and Noah hoped for a largemouth bass, but the
tugging eventually stopped, and after reeling his line in and checking the bait,
he cast again.
Fin ended up being right on both counts. Most of the summer, she had to make excuses
to her parents whenever they wanted to see each other. It wasn't that they didn't
like him--it was that he was from a different class, too poor, and they would never
approve if their daughter became serious with someone like him. "! don't care what
my parents think, I love you and always will," she would say. "We'll find a way to
be together."
But in the end they couldn't. By early September the tobacco had been harvested and
she had no choice but to return with her family to Winston-Salem. "Only the summer
is over, Allie, not us," he'd said the morning she left. "We'll never be over." But
they were. For a reason he didn't fully understand, the letters he wrote went unanswered.
Eventually he decided to leave New Bern to help get her off his mind, but also because
the Depression made earning a living in New Bern almost impossible. He went first
to Norfolk and worked at a shipyard for six months before he was laid off, then moved
to New Jersey
26
because he'd heard the economy wasn't so bad there.
He eventually found a job in a scrap yard, separating scrap metal from everything
else. The owner, a Jewish man named Morris Goldman, was intent on collecting as much
scrap metal as he could, convinced that a war was going to start in Europe and that
America would be dragged in again. Noah, though, didn't care about the reason. He
was just happy to have a job.
His years in the lumberyard had toughened him to this type of labor, and he worked
hard. Not only did it help him keep his mind off Allie during the day, but it was
something he felt he had to do. His daddy had always said: "Give a day's work for
a day's pay. Anything less is stealing.'' That attitude pleased his boss. "It's a
shame you aren't Jewish," Goldman would say, "you're such a fine boy in so many other
ways." It was the best compliment Goldman could give.
He continued to think about Allie, especially at night. He wrote her once a month
but never received a reply. Eventually he wrote a final letter and forced himself
to accept the fact that the summer they'd spent with one another was the only thing
they'd ever share.
Still, though, she stayed with him. Three years after the last letter, he went to
Winston-Salem in the hope of finding her. He went to her house, discovered that she
had moved, and after talking to some neighbors, finally called RJR. The girl
27
who answered the phone was new and didn't recognize the name, but she poked around
the personnel files for him. She found out that Allie's father had left the company
and that no forwarding address was listed. That trip was the first and last time
he ever looked for her.
For the next eight years, he worked for Goldman. At first he was one of twelve employees,
but as the years dragged on, the company grew, and he was promoted. By 1940 he had
mastered the business and was running the entire operation, brokering the deals and
managing a staff of thirty. The yard had become the largest scrap metal dealer on
the East Coast.
During that time, he dated a few different women. He became serious with one, a waitress
from the local diner with deep blue eyes and silky black hair. Although they dated
for two years and had many good times together, he never came to feel the same way
about her as he did about Allie.
But neither did he forget her. She was a few years older than he was, and it was
she who taught him the ways to please a woman, the places to touch and kiss, where
to linger, the things to whisper. They would sometimes spend an entire day in bed,
holding each other and making the kind of love that fully satisfied both of them.
She had known they wouldn't be together forever. Toward the end of their relationship
she'd
28
told him once, "I wish I could give you what you're looking for, but I don't know
what it is. There's a part of you that you keep closed off from everyone, including
me. It's as if I'm not the one you're really with. Your mind is on someone else."
He tried to deny it, but she didn't believe him. "I'm a woman--I know these things.
When you look at me sometimes, I know you're seeing someone else. It's like you keep
waiting for her to pop out of thin air to take you away from all this .... "A month
later she visited him at work and told him she'd met someone else. He understood.
They parted as friends, and the following year he received a postcard from her saying
she was married. He hadn't heard from her since.
While he was in New Jersey, he would visit his father once a year around Christmas.
They'd spend some time fishing and talking, and once in a while they'd take a trip
to the coast to go camping on the Outer Banks near Ocracoke.
In December 1941, when he was twenty-six, the war began, just as Goldman had predicted.
Noah walked into his office the following month and informed Goldman of his intent
to enlist, then returned to New Bern to say good-bye to his father. Five weeks later
he found himself in boot camp. While there, he received a letter from Goldman thanking
him for his work, together with a copy of a certificate entitling him to a small
percentage of the scrap yard if it ever sold. "I couldn't have done it without you,"
the letter
29
said. "You're the finest young man who ever worked for me, even if you aren't Jewish."
He spent his next three years with Patton's Third Army, tramping through deserts
in North Africa and forests in Europe with thirty pounds on his back, his infantry
unit never far from action. He watched his friends die around him; watched as some
of them were buried thousands of miles from home. Once, while hiding in a foxhole
near the Rhine, he imagined he saw Allie watching over him.
He remembered the war ending in Europe, then a few months later in Japan. Just before
he was discharged, he received a letter from a lawyer in New Jersey representing
Morris Goldman. Upon meeting the lawyer, he found out that Goldman had died a year
earlier and his estate liquidated. The business had been sold, and Noah was given
a check for almost seventy thousand dollars. For some reason he was oddly unexcited
about it.
The following week he returned 'to New Bern and bought the house. He remembered bringing
his father around later, showing him what he was going to do, pointing out the changes
he intended to make. His father seemed weak as he walked around, coughing and wheezing.
Noah was concerned, but his father told him not to worry, assuring him that he had
the flu.
Less than one month later his father died of pneumonia and was buried next to his
wife in the
30
local cemetery. Noah tried to stop by regularly to leave some flowers; occasionally
he left a note. And every night without fail he took a moment to remember him, then
said a prayer for the man who'd taught him everything that mattered.
After reeling in the line, he put the gear away and went back to the house. His neighbor,
Martha Shaw, was there to thank him, bringing three loaves of homemade bread and
some biscuits in appreciation for what he'd done. Her husband had been killed in
the war, leaving her with three children and a tired shack of a house to raise them
in. Winter was coming, and he'd spent a few days at her place last week repairing
her roof, replacing broken windows and sealing the others, and fixing her woodstove.
Hopefully, it would be enough to get them through.
Once she'd left, he got in his battered Dodge truck and went to see Gus. He always
stopped there when he was going to the store because Gus's family didn't have a car.
One of the daughters hopped up and rode with him, and they did their shopping at
Capers General Store. When he got home he didn't unpack the groceries right away.
Instead he showered, found a Budweiser and a book by Dylan Thomas, and went to sit
on the porch.
She still had trouble believing it, even as she held the proof in her hands.
It had been in the newspaper at her parents'
31
house three Sundays ago. She had gone to the kitchen to get a cup of coffee, and
when she'd returned to the table, her father had smiled and pointed at a small picture.
"Remember this?"
He handed her the paper, and after an uninterested first glance, something in the
picture caught her eye and she took a closer look. "It can't be," she whispered,
and when her father looked at her curiously, she ignored him, sat down, and read
the article without speaking. She vaguely remembered her mother coming to the table
and sitting opposite her, and when she finally put aside the paper, her mother was
staring at her with the same expression her father had just moments before.
"Are you okay?" her mother asked over her coffee cup. "You look a little pale." She
didn't answer right away, she couldn't, and it was then that she'd noticed her hands
were shaking. That had been when it started.
"And here it will end, one way or the other," she whispered again. She refolded the
scrap of paper and put it back, remembering that she had left her parents' home later
that day with the paper so she could cut out the article. She read it again before
she went to bed that night, trying to fathom the coincidence, and read it again the
next morning as if to make sure the whole thing wasn't a dream. And now, after three
weeks of long walks alone, after three weeks of distraction, it was the reason she'd
come.
32
When asked, she said her erratic behavior was due to stress. It was the perfect excuse;
everyone understood, including Lon, and that's why he hadn't argued when she'd wanted
to get away for a couple of days. The wedding plans were stressful to everyone involved.
Almost five hundred people were invited, including the governor, one senator, and
the ambassador to Peru. It was too much, in her opinion, but their engagement was
news and had dominated the social pages since they had announced their plans six
months ago. Occasionally she felt like running away with Lon to get married without
the fuss. But she knew he wouldn't agree; like the aspiring politician he was, he
loved being the center of attention.
She took a deep breath and stood again. "It's now or never," she whispered, then
picked up her things and went to the door. She paused only slightly before opening
it and going downstairs. The manager smiled as she walked by, and she could feel
his eyes on her as she left and went to her car. She slipped behind the wheel, looked
at herself one last time, then started the engine and turned right onto Front Street.
She wasn't surprised that she still knew her way around town so well. Even though
she hadn't been here in years, it wasn't large and she navigated the streets easily.
After crossing the Trent River on an old-fashioned drawbridge, she turned onto a
gravel road and began the final leg of her journey.
33
It was beautiful here in the low country, as it always had been. Unlike the Piedmont
area where she grew up, the land was flat, but it had the same silty, fertile soil
that was ideal for cotton and tobacco. Those two crops and timber kept the towns
alive in this part of the state, and as she drove along the road outside town, she
saw the beauty that had first attracted people to this region.
To her, it hadn't changed at all. Broken sunlight passed through water oaks and hickory
trees a hundred feet tall, illuminating the colors of fall. On her left, a river
the color of iron veered toward the road and then turned away before giving up its
life to a different, larger river another mile ahead. The gravel road itself wound
its way between antebellum farms, and she knew that for some of the farmers, life
hadn't changed since before their grandparents were born. The constancy of the place
brought back a flood of memories, and she felt her insides tighten as one by one
she recognized landmarks she'd long since forgotten.
The sun hung just above the trees on her left, and as she rounded a curve, she passed
an old church, abandoned for years but still standing. She had explored it that summer,
looking for souvenirs from the War between the States, and as her car passed by,
the memories of that day became stronger, as if they'd just happened yesterday.
34
A majestic oak tree on the banks of the river came into view next, and the memories
became more intense. It looked the same as it had back then, branches low and thick,
stretching horizontally along the ground with Spanish moss draped over the limbs
like a veil. She remembered sitting beneath the tree on a hot July day with someone
who looked at her with a longing that took everything else away. And it had been
at that moment that she'd first fallen in love.
He was two years older than she was, and as she drove along this roadway-in-time,
he slowly came into focus once again. He always looked older than he really was,
she remembered thinking. His appearance was that of someone slightly weathered, almost
like a farmer coming home after hours in the field. He had the callused hands and
broad shoulders that came to those who worked hard for a living, and the first faint
lines were beginning to form around the dark eyes that seemed to read her every thought.
He was tall and strong, with light brown hair, and handsome in his own way, but it
was his voice that she remembered most of all. He had read to her that day; read
to her as they lay in the grass beneath the tree with an accent that was soft and
fluent, almost musical in quality. It was the kind of voice that belonged on radio,
and it seemed to hang in the air when he read to her. She remembered closing her
eyes, listening closely, and letting the words he was reading touch her soul:
35
It coaxes me to the vapor and the dusk.
I depart as air, I shake my white locks at the runaway sun...
He thumbed through old books with dog-eared pages, books he'd read a hundred times.
He'd read for a while, then stop, and the two of them would talk. She would tell
him what she wanted in her life--her hopes and dreams for the future--and he would
listen intently and then promise to make it all come true. And the way he said it
made her believe him, and she knew then how much he meant to her. Occasionally, when
she asked, he would talk about himself or explain why he had chosen a particular
poem and what he thought of it, and at other times he just studied her in that intense
way of his.
They watched the sun go down and ate together under the stars. It was getting late
by then, and she knew her parents would be furious if they knew where she was. At
that moment, though, it really didn't matter to her. All she could think about was
how special the day had been, how special he was, and as they started toward her
house a few minutes later, he took her hand in his and she felt the way it warmed
her the whole way back.
Another turn in the road and she finally saw it in the distance. The house had changed
dramatically from what she remembered. She slowed
36
the car as she approached, turning into the long, tree-lined dirt drive that led
to the beacon that had summoned her from Raleigh.
She drove slowly, looking toward the house, and took a deep breath when she saw him
on the porch, watching her car. He was dressed casually. From a distance, he looked
the same as he had back then. For a moment, when the light from the sun was behind
him, he almost seemed to vanish into the scenery.
Her car continued forward, rolling slowly, then finally stopped beneath an oak tree
that shaded the front of the house. She turned the key, never taking her eyes from
him, and the engine sputtered to a halt.
He stepped off the porch and began to approach her, walking easily, then suddenly
stopped cold as she emerged from the car. For a long time all they could do was stare
at each other without moving.
Allison Nelson, twenty-nine years old and engaged, a socialite, searching for answers
she needed to know, and Noah Calhoun, the dreamer, thirty-one, visited by the ghost
that had come to dominate his life.
37 union
Neither one of them moved as they faced each other.
He hadn't said anything, his muscles seemed frozen, and for a second she thought
he didn't recognize her. Suddenly she felt guilty about showing up this way, without
warning, and this made it harder. She had thought it would be easier somehow, that
she would know what to say. But she didn't. Everything that came into her head seemed
inappropriate, somehow lacking.
Thoughts of the summer they'd shared came back to her, and as she stared at him,
she noticed how little he'd changed since she'd last seen him. He looked good, she
thought. With his shirt tucked loosely into old faded ieans, she could see the same
broad shoulders she remembered, tapering down to narrow hips and a flat store-
38
ach. He was tan, too, as if he'd worked outside all summer, and though his hair was
a little thinner and lighter than she remembered, he looked the same as he had when
she'd known him last.
When she was finally ready, she took a deep breath and smiled.
"Hello, Noah. It's good to see you again." Her comment startled him, and he looked
at her with amazement in his eyes. Then, after shaking his head slightly, he slowly
began to smile.
"You too 番 e stammered. He brought his hand to his chin, and she noticed he hadn't
shaved. "It's really you, isn't it? I can't believe
it "
She heard the shock in his voice as he spoke,
and surprising her, it all came together--being here, seeing him. She felt something
twitch inside, something deep and old, something that made her dizzy for just a second.
She caught herself fighting for control. She hadn't expected this to happen, didn't
want it to happen. She was engaged now. She hadn't come
here for this.., yet...
Yet...
Yet the feeling went on despite herself, and for a brief moment she felt fifteen
again. Felt as she hadn't in years, as if all her dreams could still come true.
Felt as though she'd finally come home. Without another word they came together,
as
39
if it were the most natural thing in the world, and he put his arms around her, drawing
her close. They held each other tightly, making it real, both of them letting the
fourteen years of separation dissolve in the deepening twilight.
They stayed like that for a long time before she finally pulled back to look at him.
Up close, she could see the changes she hadn't noticed at first. He was a man now,
and his face had lost the softness of youth. The faint lines around his eyes had
deepened, and there was a scar on his chin that hadn't been there before. There was
a new edge to him; he seemed less innocent, more cautious, and yet the way he was
holding her made her realize how much she'd missed him since she'd seen him last.
Her eyes brimmed with tears as they finally released each other. She laughed nervously
under her breath while wiping the tears from the corners of her eyes.
"Are you okay?" he asked, a thousand other questions on his face.
"I'm sorry, I didn't mean to cry .... "
"It's okay," he said, smiling, "I still can't believe it's you. How did you find
me?"
She stepped back, trying to compose herself, wiping away the last of her tears.
"I saw the story on the house in the Raleigh paper a couple of weeks ago, and I had
to come see you again."
Noah smiled broadly. "I'm glad you did." He
40
stepped back just a bit. "God, you look fantastic. You're even prettier now than
you were then."
She felt the blood in her face. Just like fourteen years ago.
"Thank you. You look great, too." And he did, no doubt about it. The years had treated
him well.
"So what have you been up to? Why are you here ?"
His questions brought her back to the present, making her realize what could happen
if she wasn't careful. Don't let this get out of hand, she told herself; the longer
it goes on, the harder it's going to be. And she didn't want it to get any harder.
But God, those eyes. Those soft, dark eyes. She turned away and took a deep breath,
wondering how to say it, and when she finally started, her voice was quiet. "Noah,
before you get the wrong idea, I did want to see you again, but there's more to it
than iust that." She paused for a second. "I came here for a reason. There's
something I have to tell you."
"What is it?"
She looked away and didn't answer for a moment, surprised that she couldn't tell
him just yet. In the silence, Noah felt a sinking feeling in his stomach. Whatever
it was, was bad.
"I don't know how to say it. I thought I did at first, but now I'm not so sure ....
"
41
The air was suddenly rattled by the sharp cry of a raccoon, and Clem came out from
under the porch, barking gruffly. Both of them turned at the commotion, and Allie
was glad for the distraction.
"Is he yours?" she asked.
Noah nodded, feeling the tightness in his stomach. "Actually it's a she. Clementine's
her name. But yeah, she's all mine." They both watched as Clem shook her head, stretched,
then wandered toward the sounds. Allie's eyes widened just a bit when she saw her
limp away.
"What happened to her leg?" she asked, stalling for time.
"Hit by a car a few months back. Doc Harrison, the vet, called me to see if I wanted
her because her owner didn't anymore. After I saw what had happened, I guess I just
couldn't let her be put down."
"You were always nice like that," she said, trying to relax. She paused, then looked
past him toward the house. "You did a Wonderful job restoring it. It looks perfect,
just like 1 knew it would someday."
He turned his head in the same direction as hers while he wondered about the small
talk and what she was holding back.
"Thanks, that's nice of you. It was quite a pro-iect, though. I don't know if I would
do it again."
"Of course you would," she said. She knew
42
exactly how he felt about this place. But then, she knew how he felt about everything--or
at least she had a long time ago.
And with that thought, she realized how much had changed since then. They were strangers
now; she could tell by looking at him. Could tell that fourteen years apart was a
long time. Too long.
"What is it, Allie?" He turned to her, compelling her to look, but she continued
to stare at the house.
"I'm being rather silly, aren't I?" she asked, trying to smile.
"What do you mean?"
"This whole thing. Showing up out of the blue, not knowing what I want to say. You
must think I'm crazy."
"You're not crazy," he said gently. He reached for her hand, and she let him hold
it as they stood next to one another. He went on:
"Even though I don't know why, I can see this
is hard for you. Why don't we go for a walk?" "Like we used to?"
"Why not? I think we both could use one."
She hesitated and looked to his front door.
"Do you need to tell anyone?"
He shook his head.
"No, there's no one to tell. It's just me and Clem."
Even though she'd asked, she had suspected there wouldn't be anyone else, and inside
she
43
didn't know how to feel about that. But it did make what she wanted to say a little
harder. It would have been easier if there was someone else.
They started toward the river and turned on a path near the bank. She let go of his
hand, surprising him, and walked on with just enough distance between them so that
they couldn't accidentally touch.
He looked at her. She was pretty still, with thick hair and soft eyes, and she moved
so gracefully that it almost seemed as though she were gliding. He'd seen beautiful
women before, though, women who caught his eye, but to his mind they usually lacked
the traits he found most desirable. Traits like intelligence, confidence, strength
of spirit, passion, traits that inspired others to greatness, traits he aspired to
himself.
Allie had those traits, he knew, and as they walked now, he sensed them once again
lingering beneath the surface. "A living poem" had always been the words that came
to mind when he tried to describe her to others.
"How long have you been back here?" she asked as the path gave way to a small grass
hill.
"Since last December. I worked up north for a while, then spent the last three years
in Europe."
She looked to him with questions in her eyes. "The war?"
He nodded and she went on.
44
"I thought you might be there. I'm glad you made it out okay."
"Me too," he said.
"Are you glad to be back home?"
"Yeah. My roots are here. This is where I'm supposed to be." He paused. "But what
about you?" He asked the question softly, suspecting the worst.
It was a long moment before she answered. "I'm engaged."
He looked down when she said it, suddenly feeling just a bit weaker. So that was
it. That's what she needed to tell him.
"Congratulations," he finally said, wondering how convincing he sounded. "When's
the big day?"
"Three weeks from Saturday. Lon wanted a
November wedding."
"Lon?"
"Lon Hammond Jr. My fianc6."
He nodded, not surprised. The Hammonds were one of the most powerful and influential
families in the state. Cotton money. Unlike that of his own father, the death of
Lon Hammond Sr. had made the front page of the newspaper. "I've heard of them. His
father built quite a business. Did Lon take over for him?"
She shook her head. "No, he's a lawyer. He has his own practice downtown."
"With his name, he must be busy."
"He is. He works a lot."
45
He thought he heard something in her tone,
and the next question came automatically. "Does he treat you well?"
She didn't answer right away, as if she were considering the question for the first
time. Then:
"Yes. He's a good man, Noah. You would like him."
Her voice was distant when she answered, or at least he thought it was. Noah wondered
if it was just his mind playing tricks on him.
"How's your daddy doing?" she asked. Noah took a couple of steps before answering.
"He passed on earlier this year, right after I got back."
"I'm sorry," she said softly, knowing how much he had meant to Noah.
He nodded, and the two walked in silence for a moment.
They reached the top of the hill and stopped. The oak tree was in the distance, with
the sun glowing orange behind it. Allie could feel his
eyes on her as she stared in that direction.'
"A lot of memories there, Allie."
She smiled. "I know. I saw it when I came in. Do you remember the day we spent there?"
"Yes," he answered, volunteering no more. "Do you ever think about it?"
"Sometimes," he said. "Usually when I'm working out this way. It sits on my property
now."
"You bought it?"
46
"I just couldn't bear to see it turned into kitchen cabinets."
She laughed under her breath, feeling strangely pleased about that. "Do you still
read poetry ?"
He nodded. "Yeah. I never stopped. I guess it's in my blood."
"Do you know, you're the only poet I've ever met."
"I'm no poet. I read, but I can't write a verse. I've tried."
"You're still a poet, Noah Taylor Calhoun." Her voice softened. "I still think about
it a lot. It was the first time anyone ever read poetry to me before. In fact, it's
the only time."
Her comment made both of them drift back and remember as they slowly circled back
to the house, following a new path that passed near the dock. As the sun dropped
a little lower and the sky turned orange, he asked:
"So, how long are you staying?"
"I don't know. Not long. Maybe until tomorrow or the next day."
"Is your fianc here on business?"
She shook her head. "No, he's still in Raleigh."
Noah raised his eyebrows. "Does he know you're here?"
She shook her head again and answered slowly. "No. I told him I was looking for antiques.
He wouldn't understand my coming here."
47
Noah was a little surprised by her answer. It was one thing to come and visit, but
it was an entirely different matter to hide the truth from her fianc6.
"You didn't have to come here to tell me you were engaged. You could have written
me instead, or even called."
"I know. But for some reason, I had to do it in person."
"Why?"
She hesitated. "I don't know . . . ," she said, trailing off, and the way she said
it made him believe her. The gravel crunched beneath their feet as they walked in
silence for a few steps. Then he asked:
"Allie, do you love him?"
She answered automatically. "Yes, I love him."
The words hurt. But again, he thought he heard something in her tone, as if she were
saying it to convince herself. He stopped and gently took her shoulders in his hands,
making her face him. The fading sunlight reflected in her eyes as he spoke.
"If you're happy, Allie, and you love him, I won't try to stop you from going back
to him. But if there's a part of you that isn't sure, then don't do it. This isn't
the kind of thing you go into halfway."
Her answer came almost too quickly.
"I'm making the right decision, Noah."
48
He stared for a second, wondering if he believed her. Then he nodded and the two
began to walk again. After a moment he said: "I'm not making this easy for you, am
I?"
She smiled a little. "It's okay. I really can't blame you."
"I'm sorry anyway."
"Don't be. There's no reason to be sorry. I'm the one who should be apologizing.
Maybe I should have written."
He shook his head. "To be honest, I'm still glad you came. Despite everything. It's
good to see you again."
"Thank you, Noah."
"Do you think it would be possible to start over ?"
She looked at him curiously.
"You were the best friend I ever had, Allie. I'd still like to be friends, even if
you are engaged, and even if it is just for a couple of days. How about we just kind
of get to know each other again?"
She thought about it, thought about staying or leaving, and decided that since he
knew about her engagement, it would probably be all right. Or at least not wrong.
She smiled slightly and nodded.
"I'd like that."
"Good. How about dinner? I know a place that serves the best crab in town."
"Sounds great. Where?"
49
"My house. I've had the traps out all week, and I saw that I had some good ones caged
a
couple days ago. Do you mind?"
"No, that sounds fine."
He smiled and pointed over his shoulder with his thumb. "Great. They're at the dock.
I'll just be a couple of minutes."
Allie watched him walk away and noticed the tension she'd felt when telling him about
her engagement was beginning to fade. Closing her eyes, she ran her hands through
her hair and let the light breeze fan her cheek. She took a deep breath and held
it for a moment, feeling the muscles in her shoulders further relax as she exhaled.
Finally, opening her eyes, she stared at the beauty that surrounded her.
She always loved evenings like this, evenings where the faint aroma of autumn leaves
rode on the backs of soft southern winds. She loved the trees and the sounds they
made. Listening to them helped her relax even more. After a moment, she turned toward
Noah and looked at him almost as a stranger might.
God, he looked good. Even after all this time. She watched him as he reached for
a rope that hung in the water. He began to pull it, and despite the darkening sky,
she saw the muscles in his arm flex as he lifted the cage from the water. He let
it hang over the river for a moment and shook it, letting most of the water escape.
After setting the trap on the dock, he opened it and
50
began to remove the crabs one by one, placing them into a bucket.
She started walking toward him then, listening to the crickets chirp, and remembered
a lesson from childhood. She counted the number of chirps in a minute and added twenty-nine.
Sixty-seven degrees, she thought as she smiled to herself. She didn't know if it
was accurate, but it felt about right.
As she walked, she looked around and realized she had forgotten how fresh and beautiful
everything seemed here. Over her shoulder, she saw the house in the distance. He
had left a couple of lights on, and it seemed to be the only house around. At least
the only one with electricity. Out here, outside the town limits, nothing was certain.
Thousands of country homes still lacked the luxury of indoor lighting.
She stepped on the dock and it creaked under her foot. The sound reminded her of
a rusty squeeze-box, and Noah glanced up and winked, then went back to checking the
crabs, making sure they were the right size. She walked to the rocker that sat on
the dock and touched it, running her hand along the back. She could picture him sitting
in it, fishing, thinking, reading. It was old and weather-beaten, rough feeling.
She wondered how much time he spent here alone, and she wondered about his thoughts
at times like those.
"It was my daddy's chair," he said, not look-
51
ing up, and she nodded. She saw bats in the sky, and frogs had joined the crickets
in their evening harmony.
She walked to the other side of the dock, feeling a sense of closure. A compulsion
had driven her here, and for the first time in three weeks the feeling was gone.
She'd somehow needed Noah to know about her engagement, to understand, to accept
it--she was sure of that now--and while thinking of him, she was reminded of something
they'd shared from the summer they were together. With head down, she paced around
slowly, looking for it until she found it--the carving.
Noah loves Allie,
in a heart. Carved into the dock a few days before she'd left.
A breeze broke the stillness and chilled her, making her cross her arms. She stood
that way, alternately looking down at the carving and then toward the river, until
she heard him reach her side. She could feel his closeness, his warmth, as she spoke.
"It's so peaceful here," she 'said, her voice dreamlike.
"I know. I come down here a lot now just to
be close to the water. It makes me feel good." "I would, too, if I were you."
"Come on, let's go. The mosquitoes are getting vicious, and I'm starved."
The sky had turned black, and Noah started toward the house, Allie right beside him.
In the
52
silence her mind wandered, and she felt a little light-headed as she walked along
the path. She wondered what he was thinking about her being here and wasn't exactly
sure if she knew herself. When they reached the house a couple of minutes later,
Clem greeted them with a wet nose in the wrong place. Noah motioned her away, and
she left with her tail between her legs.
He pointed to her car. "Did you leave anything in there that you need to get out?"
"No, I got in earlier and unpacked already." Her voice sounded different to her,
as if the years had suddenly been undone.
"Good enough," he said as he reached the back porch and started up the steps. He
set the bucket by the door, then led the way inside, heading toward the kitchen.
It was on the immediate right, large and smelling of new wood. The cabinets had been
done in oak, as was the floor, and the windows were large and faced east, allowing
the light from morning sun. It was a tasteful restoration, not overdone as was com-
mon when homes like this were rebuilt.
"Do you mind if I look around?"
"No, go ahead. I did some shopping earlier, and I still have to put the groceries
away."
Their eyes met for a second, and Allie knew as she turned that he continued to watch
her as she left the room. Inside she felt that little twitch again.
She toured the house for the next few minutes,
53
walking through the rooms, noticing how wonderful it looked. By the time she'd finished,
it was hard to remember how run-down it had been. She came down the stairs, turned
toward the kitchen, and saw his profile. For a second he looked like a young man
of seventeen again, and it made her pause a split second before going on. Damn, she
thought, get a hold of yourself. Remember that you're engaged now.
He was standing by the counter, a couple of cabinet doors open wide, empty grocery
bags on the floor, whistling quietly. He smiled at her before putting a few more
cans into one of the cabinets. She stopped a few feet from him and leaned against
the counter, one leg over the other. She shook her head, amazed at how much he had
done.
"It's unbelievable, Noah. How long did the restoration take?"
He looked up from the last bag he was
unpacking. "Almost a year."
"Did you do it yourself?"
He laughed under his breath. "No. I always thought I would when I was young, and
I started that way. But it was just too much. It would have taken years, and so I
ended up hiring some people.., actually a lot of people. But even with them, it was
still a lot of work, and most of the
time I didn't stop until past midnight." "Why'd you work so hard?" Ghosts, he wanted
to say, but didn't.
54
"I don't know. Just wanted to finish, I guess. Do you want anything to drink before
I start dinner ?"
"What do you have?"
"Not much, really. Beer, tea, coffee."
"Tea sounds good."
He gathered the grocery bags and put them away, then walked to a small room off the
kitchen before returning with a box of tea. He pulled out a couple of teabags and
set them by the stove, then filled the teapot. After putting it on the burner, he
lit a match, and she heard the sound of flames as they came to life.
"It'll be just a minute," he said. "This stove
heats up pretty quick."
"That's fine."
When the teapot whistled, he poured two cups and handed one to her.
She smiled and took a sip, then motioned toward the window. "I'11 bet the kitchen
is beautiful when the morning light shines in."
He nodded. "It is. I had larger windows put in on this side of the house for just
that reason. Even in the bedrooms upstairs."
"I'm sure your guests enjoy that. Unless of course they want to sleep late."
"Actually, I haven't had any guests stay over yet. Since my daddy passed on, I don't
really know who to invite."
By his tone, she knew he was just making conversation. Yet for some reason it made
her
55
feel.., lonely. He seemed to realize how she was feeling, but before she could dwell
on it, he changed the subject.
"I'm going to get the crabs in to marinate for a few minutes before I steam 'em,"
he said, putting his cup on the counter. He went to the cupboard and removed a large
pot with a steamer and lid. He brought the pot to the sink, added water, then carried
it to the stove.
"Can I give you a hand with something?"
He answered over his shoulder. "Sure. How about cutting up some vegetables for the
fryer. There's plenty in the icebox, and you can find a bowl over there."
He motioned to the cabinet near the sink, and she took another sip of tea before
setting her cup on the counter and retrieving the bowl. She carried it to the icebox
and found some okra, zucchini, onions, and carrots on the bottom shelf. Noah joined
her in front of the open door, and she moved to make room for him. She could smell
him as he stood next to her--clean, familiar, distinctive--and felt his arm brush
against her as he leaned over and reached inside. He removed a beer and a bottle
of hot sauce, then returned to the stove.
Noah opened the beer and poured it in the water, then added the hot sauce and some
other seasoning as well. After stirring the water to make sure the powders were dissolved,
he went to the back door to get the crabs.
56
He paused for a moment before going back inside and stared at Allie, watching her
cut the carrots. As he did that, he wondered again why she had come, especially now
that she was engaged. None of this seemed to make much sense to him.
But then, Allie had always been surprising. He smiled to himself, remembering back
to the way she had been. Fiery, spontaneous, passion-ate--as he imagined most artists
to be. And she was definitely that. Artistic talent like hers was a gift. He remembered
seeing some paintings in the museums in New York and thinking that her work was just
as good as what he had seen there.
She had given him a painting before she'd left that summer. It hung above the fireplace
in the living room. She'd called it a picture of her dreams, and to him it had seemed
extremely sensual. When he looked at it, and he often did late in the evening, he
could see desire in the colors and the lines, and if he focused carefully, he could
imagine what she had been thinking with every stroke.
A dog barked in the distance, and Noah realized he had been standing with the door
open a long time. He quickly closed it, turning back to the kitchen. And as he walked,
he wondered if she had noticed how long he'd been gone.
"How's it going?" he asked, seeing she was almost finished.
57
"Good. I'm almost done here. Anything else for dinner?"
"I have some homemade bread that I was planning on."
"Homemade?"
"From a neighbor," he said as he put the pail in the sink. He started the faucet
and began to rinse the crabs, holding them under the water, then letting them scurry
around the sink while he rinsed the next one. Allie picked up her cup and came over
to watch him.
"Aren't you afraid they'll pinch you when you grab them?"
"No. Just grab 'em like this," he said, demonstrating, and she smiled.
"I forget you've done this your whole life."
"New Bern's small, but it does teach you how to do the things that matter."
She leaned against the counter, standing close to him, and emptied her cup. When
the crabs were ready he put them in the pot on the stove. He washed his hands, turning
to speak to her as he did so.
"You want to sit on the porch for a few min-
utes? I'd like to let 'em soak for a half hour." "Sure," she said.
He wiped his hands, and together they went to the back porch. Noah flipped on the
light as they went outside, and he sat in the older rocker, offering the newer one
to her. When he saw her cup was empty, he went inside for a moment and
58
emerged with another cup of tea and a beer for himself. He held out the cup and she
took it, sipping again before she set it on the table beside the chairs.
"You were sitting out here when I came, weren't you?"
He answered as he made himself comfortable. "Yeah. I sit out here every night. It's
a habit
HOW."
"I can see why," she said as she looked around. "So, what is it you do these days?"
"Actually, I don't do anything but work on the house right now. It satisfies my creative
urges."
"How can you... I mean..." "Morris Goldman." "Excuse me?"
He smiled. "My old boss from up north. His name was Morris Goldman. He offered me
a part of the business just as I enlisted and died before I got home. When I got
back to the States, his lawyers gave me a check big enough to buy this place and
fix it up."
She laughed under her breath. "You always told me you'd find a way to do it."
They both sat quietly for a moment, thinking back again. Allie took another sip of
tea.
"Do you remember sneaking over here the night you first told me about this place?"
He nodded, and she went on:
59
"I got home a little late that evening, and my parents were furious when I finally
came in. I can still picture my daddy standing in the living room smoking a cigarette,
my mother on the sofa staring straight ahead. I swear, they looked as if a family
member had died. That was the first time my parents knew I was serious about you,
and my mother had a long talk with me later that night. She said to me, 'I'm sure
you think that I don't understand what you're going through, but I do. It's just
that sometimes, our future is dictated by what we are, as opposed to what we want.'
I remember being really hurt when she said that."
"You told me about it the next day. It hurt my feelings, too. I liked your parents,
and I had no idea they didn't like me."
"It wasn't that they didn't like you. They didn't think you deserved me."
"There's not much difference."
There was a sadness in his voice when he responded, and she knew he'was right to
feel that way. She looked toward the stars while she ran her hand through her hair,
pulling back the strands that had fallen onto her face.
"I know that. I always did. Maybe that's why my mother and I always seem to have
a distance between us when we talk."
"How do you feel about it now?"
"The same as I did back then. That it's wrong,
60
that it isn't fair. It was a terrible thing for a girl to learn. That status is more
important than feelings.''
Noah smiled softly at her answer but said nothing.
"I've thought about you ever since that summer,'' she said.
"You have?"
"Why wouldn't you think so?" She seemed genuinely surprised.
"You never answered my letters."
"You wrote ?"
"Dozens of letters. I wrote you for two years without receiving a single reply."
She slowly shook her head before lowering her eyes.
"I didn't know... ," she finally said, quietly, and he knew it must have been her
mother, checking the mail, removing the letters without her knowledge. It was what
he had always suspected, and he watched as Allie came to the same realization.
"It was wrong of her to do that, Noah, and I'm sorry she did. But try to understand.
Once I left, she probably thought it would be easier for me to just let it go. She
never understood how much you meant to me, and to be honest, I don't even know if
she ever loved my father the way I loved you. In her mind, she was just trying to
protect my feelings, and she probably thought the best way to do that was to hide
the letters you sent."
61
"That wasn't her decision to make," he said quietly.
"I know."
"Would it have made a difference even if you'd got them?"
"Of course. I always wondered what you were up tO."
"No, I mean with us. Do you think we would have made it?"
It took a moment for her to answer.
"I don't know, Noah. I really don't, and you don't either. We're not the same people
we were then. We've changed, we've grown. Both of us."
She paused. He didn't respond, and in the silence she looked toward the creek. She
went on:
"But yes, Noah, I think we would have. At least, I'd like to think we would have."
He nodded, looked down, then turned away. "What's Lon like?"
She hesitated, not expecting the question. Bringing up Lon's name brought slight
feelings of guilt to the surface, and for a moment she didn't know how to answer.
She reached for her cup, took another sip of tea, and listened as a woodpecker tapped
in the distance. She spoke quietly.
"Lon's handsome, charming, and successful, and most of my friends are insanely jealous.
They think he's perfect, and in a lot of ways he is. He's kind to me, he makes me
laugh, and I
62
know he loves me in his own way." She paused for a moment, collecting her thoughts.
"But there's always going to be something missing in our relationship."
She surprised herself with her answer but knew it was true nonetheless. And she also
knew by looking at him that Noah had suspected the
answer in advance.
"Why?"
She smiled weakly and shrugged as she answered. Her voice was barely above a whisper.
"I guess I still look for the kind of love we had that summer."
Noah thought about what she had said for a long while, thinking about the relationships
he'd had since he'd last seen her.
"How about you?" she asked. "Did you ever think about us?"
"All the time. I still do."
"Are you seeing anyone?"
"No," he answered, shaking his head.
Both of them seemed to think about that, trying but finding it impossible to displace
from their minds. Noah finished his beer, surprised that he had emptied it so quickly.
"I'm going to go start the water. Can I get you anything?"
She shook her head, and Noah went to the kitchen and put the crabs in the steamer
and the bread in the oven. He found some flour and cornstarch for the vegetables,
coated them, and
63
put some grease into the frying pan. After turning the heat on low, he set a timer
and pulled another beer from the icebox before heading back to the porch. And while
he was doing those things, he thought about Allie and the love that was missing from
both their lives.
Allie, too, was thinking. About Noah, about herself, about a lot of things. For a
moment she wished she weren't engaged but then quickly cursed herself. It wasn't
Noah she loved; she loved what they once had been. Besides, it was normal to feel
this way. Her first real love, the only man she'd ever been with--how could she expect
to forget him?
Yet was it normal for her insides to twitch whenever he came near? Was it normal
to confess things she could never tell anyone else? Was it normal to come here three
weeks from her wedding day?
"No, it's not," she finally whispered to herself as she looked to the evening sky.
"There's nothing normal about any of this."
Noah came out at that moment and she smiled at him, glad he'd come back so she didn't
have to think about it anymore. "It's going to take a few minutes," he said as he
sat back down.
"That's fine. I'm not that hungry yet."
He looked at her then, and she saw the softness in his eyes. "I'm glad you came,
Allie," he said.
64
"Me too. I almost didn't, though."
"Why did you come?"
I was compelled, she wanted to say, but didn't.
"Just to see you, to find out what you've been up to. To see how you are."
He wondered if that was all but didn't question further. Instead he changed the subject.
"By the way, I've been meaning to ask, do you still paint?"
She shook her head. "Not anymore."
He was stunned. "Why not? You have so much talent."
"I don't know "
"Sure you do. You stopped for a reason."He was right. She'd had a reason."It's a
long story."
"I've got all night," he answered.
"Did you really think I was talented?" she asked quietly.
"C'mon," he said, reaching for her hand, "I want to show you something."
She got up and followed him through the door to the living room. He stopped in front
of the fireplace and pointed to the painting that hung above the mantel. She gasped,
surprised she hadn't noticed it earlier, more surprised it was here at all.
"You kept it?"
"Of course I kept it. It's wonderful."
She gave him a skeptical look, and he explained.
65
"It makes me feel alive when I look at it. Sometimes I have to get up and touch it.
It's just so real--the shapes, the shadows, the colors. I even dream about it sometimes.
It's incredible, Allie--I can stare at it for hours."
"You're serious," she said, shocked. "As serious as I've ever been." She didn't say
anything.
"You mean to tell me no one has ever told you that before?"
"My professor did," she finally said, "but I guess I didn't believe him."
He knew there was more. Allie looked away before continuing.
"I've been drawing and painting since I was a child. I guess that once I got a little
older, I began to think I was good at it. I enjoyed it, too. I remember working on
this painting that summer, adding to it every day, changing it as our relationship
changed. I don't even remember how it started or what I wanted it to be, but somehow
it evolved into this.
"I remember being unable to stop painting after I went home that summer. I think
it was my way of avoiding the pain I was going through. Anyway, I ended up majoring
in art in college because it was something I had to do; I remember spending hours
in the studio all by myself and enjoying every minute. I loved the freedom I felt
when I created, the way it made me feel inside to make something beautiful. Just
before I
66
graduated, my professor, who happened to also be the critic for the paper, told me
I had a lot of talent. He told me I should try my luck as an artist. But I didn't
listen to him."
She stopped there, gathering her thoughts. "My parents didn't think it was proper
for someone like me to paint for a living. I just stopped after a while. I haven't
touched a brush in years."
She stared at the painting.
"Do you think you'll ever paint again?"
"I'm not sure if I can anymore. It's been a long time."
"You can still do it, Allie. I know you can. You have a talent that comes from inside
you, from your heart, not from your fingers. What you have can't ever go away. It's
what other people only dream about. You're an artist, Allie."
The words were spoken with such sincerity that she knew he wasn't saying it just
to be nice. He truly believed in her ability, and for some reason that meant more
to her than she expected. But something else happened then, something even more powerful.
Why it happened, she never knew, but this was when the chasm began to close for Allie,
the chasm she had erected in her life to separate the pain from the pleasure. And
she suspected then, maybe not consciously, that there was more to this than even
she cared to admit.
But at that moment she still wasn't complete-
67
ly aware of it, and she turned to face him. She reached over and touched his hand,
hesitantly, gently, amazed that after all these years he'd somehow known exactly
what she'd needed to hear. When their eyes locked, she once again realized how special
he was.
And for just a fleeting moment, a tiny wisp of time that hung in the air like fireflies
in summer skies, she wondered if she was in love with him again.
The timer went off in the kitchen, a small ding,
and Noah turned away, breaking the moment, strangely affected by what had just happened
between them. Her eyes had spoken to him and whispered something he longed to hear,
yet he couldn't stop the voice inside his head, her voice, that had told him of her
love for another man. He silently cursed the timer as he walked to the kitchen and
removed the bread from the oven. He almost burned his fingers, dropped the loaf on
the counter, and saw that the frying pan was ready. He added the vegetables and heard
them begin to crackle. Then, muttering to himself, he got some butter out of the
icebox, spread some on the bread, and melted a bit more for the crabs.
Allie had followed him into the kitchen and cleared her throat.
"Can I get the table ready?"
Noah used the bread knife as a pointer. "Sure,
68
plates are over there. Utensils and napkins there. Make sure you get plenty--crabs
can be messy, so we'll need 'em." He couldn't look at her as he spoke. He didn't
want to realize he'd been mistaken about what had just happened between them. He
didn't want it to be a mistake.
Allie, too, was wondering about the moment and feeling warm as she thought of it.
The words he'd spoken replayed in her head as she found everything she needed for
the table: plates, place settings, salt and pepper. Noah handed her the bread as
she was finishing the table, and their fingers touched briefly.
He turned his attention back to the frying pan and turned the vegetables. He lifted
the lid of the steamer, saw the crabs still had a minute, and let them cook some
more. He was more composed
now and returned to small talk, easy conversation. "Have you ever had crab before?"
"A couple of times. But only in salads."
He laughed. "Then you're in for an adventure. Hold on a second." He disappeared upstairs
for a moment, then returned with a navy blue button-down shirt. He held it open for
her.
"Here, put this on. I don't want you to stain your dress."
Allie put it on and smelled the fragrance that lingered in the shirt--his smell,
distinctive, natural.
"Don't worry," he said, seeing her expression, "it's clean."
69
She laughed. "I know. It just reminds me of our first real date. You gave me your
jacket that night, remember?"
He nodded. "Yeah, I remember. Fin and Sarah were with us. Fin kept elbowing me the
whole way back to your parents' house, trying to get me to hold your hand."
"You didn't, though."
"No," he answered, shaking his head.
"Why not?"
"Shy, maybe, or afraid. I don't know. It just didn't seem like the right thing to
do at the time."
"Come to think of it, you were kind of shy, weren't you."
"I prefer the words 'quiet confidence,'" he answered with a wink, and she smiled.
The vegetables and crabs were ready about the same time. "Be careful, they're hot,"
he said as he handed them to her, and they sat across from each other at the small
wooden table. Then, realizing the tea was Still on the counter, Allie stood and brought
it over. After putting some vegetables and bread on their plates, Noah added a crab,
and Allie sat for a moment, staring at it.
"It looks like a bug."
"A good bug, though," he said. "Here, let me show you how it's done."
He demonstrated quickly, making it look easy, removing the meat and putting it on
her plate.
70
Allie crushed the legs too hard the first time and the time after that, and had to
use her fingers to get the shells away from the meat. She felt clumsy at first, worrying
that he saw every mistake, but then she realized her own insecurity. He didn't care
about things like that. He never had.
"So, whatever happened to Fin?" she asked. It took a second for him to answer.
"Fin died in the war. His destroyer was torpedoed in forty-three."
"I'm sorry," she said. "I know he was a good friend of yours."
His voice changed, a little deeper now.
"He was. I think of him a lot these days. I especially remember the last time I saw
him. I'd come home to say good-bye before I enlisted, and we ran into each other
again. He was a banker here, like his daddy was, and he and I spent a lot of time
together over the next week. Sometimes I think I talked him into joining. I don't
think he would have, except that I was going to."
"That's not fair," she said, sorry she'd brought up the subject.
"You're right. I just miss him, is all." "I liked him, too. He made me laugh." "He
was always good at that."
She looked at him slyly. "He had a crush on me, you know."
"I know. He told me about it."
"He did? What did he say?"
71
Noah shrugged. "The usual for him. That he had to fight you off with a stick. That
you chased him constantly, that sort of thing."
She laughed quietly. "Did you believe him?" "Of course," he answered, "why wouldn't
I?" "You men always stick together," she said as she reached across the table, poking
his arm with her finger. She went on. "So, tell me everything you've been up to since
I saw you last."
They started to talk then, making up for lost time. Noah talked about leaving New
Bern, about working in the shipyard and at the scrap yard in New Jersey. He spoke
fondly of Morris Goldman and touched on the war a little, avoiding most of the details,
and told her about his father and how much he missed him. Allie talked about going
to college, painting, and her hours spent volunteering at the hospital. She talked
about her family and friends and the charities she was involved with. Neither of
them brought up anybody they had dated since they'd last seen each other. Even Lon
was ignored, and though both of them noticed the omission, neither mentioned it.
Afterward Allie tried to remember the last time she and Lon had talked this way.
Although he listened well and they seldom argued, he was not the type of man to talk
like this. Like her father, he wasn't comfortable sharing his thoughts and feelings.
She'd tried to explain that she needed to be closer to him, but it had never seemed
to make a difference.
72
But sitting here now, she realized what she'd been missing.
The sky grew darker and the moon rose higher as the evening wore on. And without
either of them being conscious of it, they began to regain the intimacy, the bond
of familiarity, they had once shared.
They finished dinner, both pleased with the meal, neither talking much now. Noah
looked at his watch and saw that it was getting late. The stars were out in full,
the crickets a little quieter. He had enjoyed talking to Allie and wondered if he'd
talked too much, wondered what she'd thought about his life, hoping it would somehow
make a difference, if it could.
Noah got up and refilled the teapot. They both brought the dishes to the sink and
cleaned up the table, and he poured two more cups of hot water, adding teabags to
both.
"How about the porch again?" he asked, handing her the cup, and she agreed, leading
the way. He grabbed a quilt for her in case she got cold, and soon they had taken
their places again, the quilt over her legs, rockers moving. Noah watched her from
the corner of his eye. God, she's beautiful, he thought. And inside, he ached.
For something had happened during dinner.
Quite simply, he had fallen in love again. He knew that now as they sat next to one
another.
73
Fallen in love with a new Allie, not just her memory.
But then, he had never really stopped, and this, he realized, was his destiny.
"It's been quite a night," he said, his voice softer now.
"Yes, it has," she said, "a wonderful night." Noah turned to the stars, their twinkling
lights reminding him that she would be leaving soon, and he felt almost empty inside.
This was a night he wanted never to end. How should he tell her? What could he say
that would make her stay?
He didn't know. And thus the decision was made to say nothing. And he realized then
that he had failed.
The rockers moved in quiet rhythm. Bats again, over the river. Moths kissing the
porch light. Somewhere, he knew, there were people making love.
"Talk to me," she finally said, her voice sen-
sual. Or was his mind playing tricks?
"What should I say?"
"Talk like you did to me under the oak tree." And he did, reciting distant passages,
toasting the night. Whitman and Thomas, because he loved the images. Tennyson and
Browning, because their themes felt so familiar.
She rested her head against the back of the rocker, closing her eyes, growing just
a bit warmer by the time he'd finished. It wasn't just
74
the poems or his voice that did it. It was all of it, the whole greater than the
sum of the parts. She didn't try to break it down, didn't want to, because it wasn't
meant to be listened to that way. Poetry, she thought, wasn't written to be analyzed;
it was meant to inspire without reason, to touch without understanding.
Because of him, she'd gone to a few poetry readings offered by the English department
while in college. She'd sat and listened to different people, different poems, but
had stopped soon after, discouraged that no one inspired her or seemed as inspired
as true lovers of poetry should be.
They rocked for a while, drinking tea, sitting quietly, drifting in their thoughts.
The compulsion that had driven her here was gone now--she was glad for this--but
she worried about the feelings that had taken its place, the stirrings that had begun
to sift and swirl in her pores like gold dust in river pans. She'd tried to deny
them, hide from them, but now she realized that she didn't want them to stop. It
had been years since she'd felt this way.
Lon could not evoke these feelings in her. He never had and probably never would.
Maybe that was why she had never been to bed with him. He had tried before, many
times, using everything from flowers to guilt, and she had always used the excuse
that she wanted to wait until marriage. He took it well, usually, and she
75
sometimes wondered how hurt he would be if he ever found out about Noah.
But there was something else that made her want to wait, and it had to do with Lon
himself. He was driven in his work, and it always commanded most of his attention.
Work came first, and for him there was no time for poems and wasted evenings and
rocking on porches. She knew this was why he was successful, and part of her respected
him for that. But she also sensed it wasn't enough. She wanted something else, something
different, something more. Passion and romance, perhaps, or maybe quiet conversations
in candlelit rooms, or perhaps something as simple as not being second.
Noah, too, was sifting through his thoughts. To him, the evening would be remembered
as one of the most special times he had ever had. As he rocked, he remembered it
all in detail, then remembered it again. Everything she had done seemed somehow electric
to him, charged.
Now, sitting beside her, he wondered if she'd ever dreamed the same things he had
in the years they'd been apart. Had she ever dreamed of them holding each other again
and kissing in soft moonlight? Or did she go further and dream of their naked bodies,
which had been kept separate for far too long ....
He looked to the stars and remembered the thousands of empty nights he had spent
since they'd last seen each other. Seeing her again
76
brought all those feelings to the surface, and he found it impossible to press them
back down. He knew then he wanted to make love to her again and to have her love
in return. It was what he needed most in the world.
But he also realized it could never be. Now that she was engaged.
Allie knew by his silence that he was thinking about her and found that she reveled
in it. She didn't know what his thoughts were exactly, didn't care really, just knew
they were about her and that was enough.
She thought about their conversation at dinner and wondered about loneliness. For
some reason she couldn't picture him reading poetry to someone else or even sharing
his dreams with another woman. He didn't seem the type. Either that, or she didn't
want to believe it.
She put down the tea, then ran her hands through her hair, closing her eyes as she
did so.
"Are you tired?" he asked, finally breaking free from his thoughts.
"A little. I should really be going in a couple of minutes."
"I know," he said, nodding, his tone neutral. She didn't get up right away. Instead
she picked up the cup and drank the last swallow of tea, feeling it warm her throat.
She took the evening in. Moon higher now, wind in the trees, temperature dropping.
She looked at Noah next. The scar on his face
77
was visible from the side. She wondered if it had happened during the war, then wondered
if he'd ever been wounded at all. He hadn't mentioned it and she hadn't asked, mostly
because she didn't want to imagine him being hurt.
"I should go," she finally said, handing the quilt back to him.
Noah nodded, then stood without a word. He carried the quilt, and the two of them
walked to her car while fallen leaves crunched beneath their feet. She started to
take off the shirt he'd loaned her as he opened the door, but he stopped her.
"Keep it," he said. "I want you to have it." She didn't ask why, because she wanted
to keep it, too. She readjusted it and crossed her arms afterward to ward off the
chill. For some reason, as she stood there she was reminded of standing on her front
porch after a high school dance, waiting for a kiss.
"I had a great time tonight," he said. "Thank you for finding me."
"I did, too," she answered.
He summoned his courage. "Will I see you tomorrow?"
A simple question. She knew what the answer should be, especially if she wanted to
keep her life simple. "I don't think we should," was all she had to say, and it would
end right here and now. But for a second she didn't say anything.
The demon of choice confronted her then,
78
teased her, challenged her. Why couldn't she say it? She didn't know. But as she
looked in his eyes to find the answer she needed, she saw the man she'd once fallen
in love with, and suddenly it all came clear.
"I'd like that."
Noah was surprised. He hadn't expected her to answer this way. He wanted to touch
her then,
to take her in his arms, but he didn't. "Can you be here about noon?" "Sure. What
do you want to do?"
"You'll see," he answered. "I know just the place to go."
"Have I ever been there before?" "No, but it's a special place." "Where is it?" "It's
a surprise." "Will I like it?"
"You'll love it," he said.
She turned away before he could attempt a kiss. She didn't know if he would try but
knew for some reason that if he did, she would have a hard time stopping him. She
couldn't handle that right now, with everything going through her head. She slid
behind the wheel, breathing a sigh of relief. He shut the door for her, and she started
the engine. As the car idled, she rolled down the window just a bit.
"See you tomorrow," she said, her eyes reflecting the moonlight.
Noah waved as she backed the car out. She
79
turned it around, then drove up the lane, heading toward town. He watched the car
until the lights vanished behind far-off oak trees and the engine noise was gone.
Clem wandered up to him and he squatted down to pet her, paying special attention
to her neck, scratching the spot she couldn't reach anymore. After he looked up the
road one last time, they returned to the back porch side by side.
He sat in the rocker again, this time alone, trying once again to fathom the evening
that had just passed. Thinking about it. Replaying it. Seeing it again. Hearing it
again. Running it by in slow motion. He didn't feel like playing his guitar now,
didn't feel like reading. Didn't know what he felt.
"She's engaged," he finally whispered, and then was silent for hours, his rocker
making the only noise. The night was quiet now, with little activity except for Clem,
who visited him occasionally, checking on him as if to ask "Are you all right?"
And sometime after midnight on that clear October evening, it all rushed inward and
Noah was overcome with longing. And if anyone had seen him, they would have seen
what looked like an old man, someone who'd aged a lifetime in just a couple of hours.
Someone bent over in his rocker with his face in his hands and tears in his
eyes.
He didn't know how to stop them.
80 one alls
Lon hung up the phone.
He had called at seven, then at eight-thirty, and now he checked his watch again.
Nine forty-five.
Where was she?
He knew she was where she had said she would be because he had spoken to the manager
earlier. Yes, she had checked in and he had last seen her around six. Going to dinner,
he thought. No, he hadn't seen her since.
Lon shook his head and leaned back in his chair. He was the last one in the office,
as usual, and everything was quiet. But that was normal with an ongoing trial, even
if the trial was going well. Law was his passion, and the late hours alone gave him
the opportunity to catch up on his work without interruption.
81
He knew he would win the case because he mastered the law and charmed the jury. He
always did, and losses were infrequent now. Part of it came from being able to select
the cases he had the expertise to win. He had reached that level in his practice.
Only a select few in the city had that kind of stature, and his earnings reflected
that.
But the more important part of his success came from hard work. He had always paid
attention to details, especially when he'd begun his practice. Little things, obscure
things, and it had become a habit now. Whether it was a matter of law or presentation,
he was diligent in his study, and it had won him a few cases early in his career
when he should have lost.
And now, a little detail bothered him.
Not about the case. No, that was fine. It was something else.
Something about Allie.
But damn, he couldn't put his finger on it. He was fine when she'd left this morning.
At least he thought he was. But sometime after her call, maybe an hour or so, something
clicked in his
mind. The little detail.
Detail.
Something insignificant? Something important?
Think... think... Damn, what was it? His mind clicked.
Something... something.., something said?
82
Something had been said? Yes, that was it. He knew it. But what was it? Had Allie
said anything on the phone? That had been when it started, and he ran through the
conversation again. No, nothing out of the ordinary.
But that was it, he was sure now.
What had she said?
Her trip was good, she had checked in, had done some shopping. Left her number. That's
about all.
He thought about her then. He loved her, he was sure of that. Not only was she beautiful
and charming, but she'd become his source of stability and best friend as well. After
a hard day at work, she was the first person he would call. She would listen to him,
laugh at the right moments, and had a sixth sense about what he needed to hear.
But more than that, he admired the way she'd always spoken her mind. He remembered
that after they'd gone out a few times, he'd said to her what he said to all women
he dated--that he wasn't ready for a steady relationship. Unlike the others, though,
Allie had simply nodded and said, "Fine." But on her way out the door, she'd turned
and said: "But your problem isn't me, or your job, or your freedom, or whatever else
you think it is. Your problem is that you're alone. Your father made the Hammond
name famous, and you've probably been compared to him all your life. You've never
been your own person. A
83
life like that makes you empty inside, and you're looking for someone who will magically
fill that void. But no one can do that but you."
The words had stayed with him that night and rung true the following morning. He'd
called again, asked for a second chance, and after some persistence, she'd reluctantly
agreed.
In the four years they'd dated, she'd become everything he ever wanted, and he knew
he should spend more time with her. But practicing law made limiting his hours impossible.
She'd always understood, but still, he cursed himself for not making the time. Once
he was married, he'd shorten his hours, he promised himself. He'd have his secretary
check his schedule to make sure he wasn't overextending himself ....
Check?...
And his mind clicked another notch. Check... checking.., checking in? He looked to
the ceiling. Checking in?
Yes, that was it. He closed his 'eyes and
thought for a second. No. Nothing. What, then? C'mon, don't fail now. Think, damn
it, think. New Bern.
The thought popped into his head just then. Yes, New Bern. That was it. The little
detail, or part of it. What else, though?
New Bern, he thought again, and knew the name. Knew the town a little, mainly from
a few trials he had been in. Stopped there a few times
84
on the way to the coast. Nothing special. He and
Allie had never been there together.
But Allie had been there before ....
And the rack tightened its grip, another part coming together.
Another part.., but there was more ....
Allie, New Bern... and.., and.., something at a party. A comment in passing. From
Allie's mother. He'd hardly noticed it. But what had she said?
And Lon paled then, remembering. Remembering what had been said so long ago. Remembering
what Allie's mother had said.
It was something about Allie being in love one time with a young man from New Bern.
Called it puppy love. So what, he had thought when he'd heard it, and had turned
to smile at Allie.
But she hadn't smiled. She was angry. And then Lon guessed that she had loved that
person far more deeply than her mother had suggested.
Maybe even more deeply than she loved him. And now she was there. Interesting.
Lon brought his palms together, as though he were praying, resting them against his
lips. Coincidence? Could be nothing. Could be exactly what she said. Could be stress
and antique
shopping. Possible. Even probable.
Yet... yet.., what if?
Lon considered the other possibility, and for the first time in a long time, he became
frightened.
85
What if? What if she with him?
He cursed the trial, wishing it were over. Wishing he had gone with her. Wondering
if she'd told him the truth, hoping that she had.
And he made up his mind then not to lose her. He would do anything it took to keep
her. She was everything he'd always needed, and he'd never find another quite like
her.
So, with trembling hands, he dialed the phone for the fourth and last time that evening.
And again there was no answer.
86 yaks and
orgotten reams
Allie woke early the next morning, forced by the incessant chirping of starlings,
and rubbed her eyes, feeling the stiffness in her body. She hadn't slept well, waking
after every dream, and she remembered seeing the hands of the clock in different
positions during the night, as if verifying the passage of time.
She'd slept in the soft shirt he'd given her, and she smelled him once again while
thinking about the evening they'd spent together. The easy laughter and conversation
came back to her, and she especially remembered the way he'd talked about her painting.
It was so unexpected, yet uplifting, and as the words began to replay in her mind,
she realized how sorry she would have been had she decided not to see him again.
87
She looked out the window and watched the chattering birds search for food in early
light. Noah, she knew, had always been a morning person who greeted dawn in his own
way. She knew he liked to kayak or canoe, and she remembered the one morning she'd
spent with him in his canoe, watching the sun come up. She'd had to sneak out her
window to do it because her parents wouldn't allow it, but she hadn't been caught
and she remembered how Noah had slipped his arm around her and pulled her close as
dawn began to unfold. "Look there," he'd whispered, and she'd watched her first sunrise
with her head on his shoulder, wondering if anything could be better than what was
happening at that moment.
And as she got out of bed to take her bath, feeling the cold floor beneath her feet,
she wondered if he'd been on the water this morning watching another day begin, thinking
somehow he probably had.
She was right.
Noah was up before the sun and dressed quickly, same jeans as last night, undershirt,
clean flannel shirt, blue jacket, and boots. He brushed his teeth before going downstairs,
drank a quick glass of milk, and grabbed two biscuits on the way out the door. After
Clem greeted him with a couple of sloppy licks, he walked to the dock where his kayak
was stored. He liked to let
88
the river work its magic, loosening up his muscles, warming his body, clearing his
mind.
The old kayak, well used and river stained, hung on two rusty hooks attached to his
dock just above the waterline to keep off the barnacles. He lifted it free from the
hooks and set it at his feet, inspected it quickly, then took it to the bank. In
a couple of seasoned moves long since mastered by habit, he had it in the water working
its way upstream with himself as the pilot and engine.
The air was cool on his skin, almost crisp, and the sky was a haze of different colors:
black directly above him like a mountain peak, then blues of infinite range, becoming
lighter until it met the horizon, where gray took its place. He took a few deep breaths,
smelling pine trees and brackish water, and began to reflect. This had been part
of what he'd missed most when he had lived up north. Because of the long hours at
work, there had been little time to spend on the water. Camping, hiking, paddling
on rivers, dating, working . . . something had had to go. For the most part he'd
been able to explore New Jersey's countryside on foot whenever he'd had extra time,
but in fourteen years he hadn't canoed or kayaked once. It had been one of the first
things he'd done when he returned.
There's something special, almost mystical, about spending dawn on the water, he
thought to himself, and he did it almost every day now.
89
Sunny and clear or cold and bitter, it never mattered as he paddled in rhythm to
music in his head, working above water the color of iron. He saw a family of turtles
resting on a partially submerged log and watched as a heron broke for flight, skimming
just above the water before vanishing into the silver twilight that preceded sunrise.
He paddled out to the middle of the creek, where he watched the orange glow begin
to stretch across the water. He stopped paddling hard, giving just enough effort
to keep him in place, staring until light began to break through the trees. He always
liked to pause at day-break--there was a moment when the view was spectacular, as
if the world were being born again. Afterward he began to paddle hard, working off
the tension, preparing for the day.
While he did that, questions danced in his mind like water drops in a frying pan.
He wondered about Lon and what type of man he was, wondered about their relationship.
Most of all, though, he wondered about Allie and why she had come.
By the time he reached home, he felt renewed. Checking his watch, he was surprised
to find that it had taken two hours. Time always played tricks out there, though,
and he'd stopped questioning it months ago.
He hung the kayak to dry, stretched for a couple of minutes, and went to the shed
where he
90
stored his canoe. He carried it to the bank, leaving it a few feet from the water,
and as he turned
toward the house, he a little stiff.
The morning haze he knew the stiffness noted that his legs were still
hadn't burned off yet, and in his legs usually predicted
rain. He looked to the western sky and saw storm clouds, thick and heavy, far off
but definitely present. The winds weren't blowing hard, but they were bringing the
clouds closer. From the looks of them, he didn't want to be outside when they got
here. Damn. How much time did he have? A few hours, maybe more. Maybe less.
He showered, put on new jeans, a red shirt, and black cowboy boots, brushed his hair,
and went downstairs to the kitchen. He did the dishes from the night before, picked
up a little around the house, made himself some coffee, and went to the porch. The
sky was darker now, and he checked the barometer. Steady, but it would start dropping
soon. The western sky promised that.
He'd learned long ago to never underestimate the weather, and he wondered if it was
a good idea to go out. The rain he could deal with; lightning was a different story.
Especially if he was on the water. A canoe was no place to be when electricity sparked
in humid air.
He finished his coffee, putting off the decision until later. He went to the toolshed
and found his ax. After checking the blade by press-
91
ing his thumb to it, he sharpened it with a whetstone until it was ready. "A dull
ax is more dangerous than a sharp one," his daddy used to say.
He spent the next twenty minutes splitting and stacking logs. He did it easily, his
strokes efficient, and didn't break a sweat. He set a few logs off to the side for
later and brought them inside when he was finished, putting them by the fireplace.
He looked at Allie's painting again and reached out to touch it, bringing back the
feelings of disbelief at seeing her again. God, what was it about her that made him
feel this way? Even after all these years? What sort of power did she have over him?
He finally turned away, shaking his head, and went back to the porch. He checked
the barometer again. It hadn't changed. Then he looked at his watch.
Allie should be here soon.
Allie had finished her bath and was already dressed. Earlier she'd opened the window
to check the temperature. It wasn't cold outside, and she'd decided on a cream-colored
spring dress with long sleeves and a high neck. It was soft and comfortable, maybe
a little snug, but it looked good, and she had selected some white sandals that matched.
She spent the morning walking around down-
92
town. The Depression had taken its toll hbre, but she could see the signs of prosperity
beginning to work their way back. The Masonic theater, the oldest active theater
in the country, looked a little more run-down but was still operating with a couple
of recent movies. Fort Totten Park looked exactly the same as it had fourteen years
ago, and she assumed the kids who played on the swings after school looked the same
as well. She smiled at the memory then, thinking back to when things were simpler.
Or at least had seemed to be.
Now, it seemed, nothing was simple. It seemed so improbable, everything falling into
place as it had, and she wondered what she would have been doing now, had she never
seen the article in the paper. It wasn't very difficult to imagine, because her routines
seldom changed. It was Wednesday, which meant bridge at the country club, then on
to the Junior Women's League, where they would probably be arranging another fund-raiser
for the private school or hospital. After that, a visit with her mother, then home
to get ready for dinner with Lon, because he made it a point to leave work by seven.
It was the one night a week she saw him regularly.
She suppressed a feeling of sadness about that, hoping that one day he would change.
He had often promised to and usually followed through for a few weeks before drifting
back to the same schedule. "I can't tonight, honey," he would
93
always explain. "I'm sorry, but I can't. Let me make it up to you later."
She didn't like to argue with him about it, mostly because she knew he was telling
the truth. Trial work was demanding, both beforehand and during, yet she couldn't
help wondering sometimes why he had spent so much time courting her if he didn't
want to spend the time with her
now.
She passed an art gallery, almost walked by it in her preoccupation, then turned
and went back. She paused at the door for a second, surprised at how long it had
been since she'd been in one. At least three years, maybe longer. Why had she avoided
it?
She went inside--it had opened with the rest of the shops on Front Street--and browsed
among the paintings. Many of the artists were local, and there was a strong sea flavor
to their works. Lots of ocean scenes, sandy beaches, pelicans, old sailing ships,
tugboats, piers, and seagulls. But most of all, waves. Waves of every shape, size,
and color imaginable, and after a while they all looked alike. The artists were either
uninspired or lazy, she thought.
On one wall though, there were a few paintings that more suited her tastes. All were
by an artist she'd never heard of, Elayn, and most appeared to have been inspired
by the architecture of the Greek islands. In the painting she liked the best, she
noted the artist had purposely
94
exaggerated the scene with smaller-than-life figures, wide lines, and heavy sweeps
of color, a if not completely focused. Yet the colors were vivid and swirling, drawing
the eye in, almost directing what it should see next. It was dynamic, dramatic. The
more she thought about it, the more she liked it, and she considered buying it before
she realized that she liked it because it reminded her of her own work. She examined
it more closely and thought to herself that maybe Noah was right. Maybe she should
start painting again.
At nine-thirty Allie left the gallery and went to Hoffman-Lane, a department store
downtown. It took a few minutes to find what she was looking for, but it was there,
in the school supply section. Paper, drawing chalk, and pencils, not high quality
but good enough. It wasn't painting, but it was a start, and she was excited by the
time she got back to her room. She sat at the desk and started working: nothing specific,
just getting the feel of it again, letting shapes and colors flow from the memory
of her youth. After a few minutes of abstraction, she did a rough sketch of the street
scene as seen from her room, amazed at how easily it came. It was almost as if she'd
never stopped.
She examined it when she was finished, pleased with the effort. She wondered what
to try next and finally decided. Since she didn't have a model, she visualized it
in her head before
95
starting. And though it was harder than the street scene, it came naturally and began
to take form.
Minutes passed quickly. She worked steadily but checked the time frequently so she
wouldn't be late, and she finished it a little before noon. It had taken almost two
hours, but the end result surprised her. It looked as though it had taken a great
deal longer. After rolling it up, she put it in a bag and collected the rest of her
things. On her way out the door, she looked at herself in the mirror, feeling oddly
relaxed, not exactly sure why.
Down the stairs again and out the door. As she
left she heard a voice behind her.
"Miss?"
She turned, knowing it was directed at her. The manager. Same man as yesterday, a
curious
look on his face.
"Yes?"
"You had some calls last night."
She was shocked. "I did?" '
"Yes. All from a Mr. Hammond." Oh, God. "Lon called?"
"Yes, ma'am, four times. I talked to him when he called the second time. He was rather
concerned about you. He said he was your fianc&"
She smiled weakly, trying to hide what she was thinking. Four times? Four? What could
96
that mean? What if something had happened back home?
"Did he say anything? Is it an emergency?" He shook his head quickly. "He really
didn't say, miss, but he didn't mention anything. Actually, he sounded more concerned
about you, though."
Good, she thought. That's good. And then, just as suddenly, a pang in her chest.
Why the urgency? Why so many calls? Had she said anything yesterday? Why would he
be so persistent? It was completely unlike him.
Is there any way he could have found out? No... that was impossible. Unless someone
saw her here yesterday and called .... But they would have had to follow her out
to Noah's. No one would have done that.
She had to call him now; no way to get around it. But she didn't want to, strangely.
This was her time, and she wanted to spend it doing what she wanted. She hadn't planned
on speaking to him until later, and for some reason she felt almost as if talking
to him now would spoil the day. Besides, what was she going to say? How could she
explain being out so late? A late dinner and
then a walk? Maybe. Or a movie? Or... "Miss?"
Almost noon, she thought. Where would he be? His office, probably.... No. In court,
she suddenly realized, and immediately felt as if she'd been released from shackles.
There was no
97
way she could talk to him, even if she wanted to. She was surprised by her feelings.
She shouldn't feel this way, she knew, and yet it didn't bother
her. She looked at her watch, acting now.
"Is it really almost twelve?"
The manager nodded after looking at the clock. "Yes, a quarter till, actually."
"Unfortunately," she started, "he's in court right now and I can't reach him. If
he does call again, could you tell him I'm shopping and that I'll try to call him
later?"
"Of course," he answered. She could see the question in his eyes, though: But where
were you last night?
He had known exactly when she'd come in. Too late for a single woman in this small
town, she was sure.
"Thank you," she said, smiling. "I'd appreciate it."
Two minutes later she was in her car, driving to Noah's, anticipating the day, largely
unconcerned about the phone calls. Yesterday she would have been, and she wondered
what that meant.
As she was driving over the drawbridge less than four minutes after she'd left the
inn, Lon called from the courthouse.
98
N)ah was sitting in his rocker, drinking sweet tea, listening for the car, when he
finally heard it turn up the drive. He went around front and watched the car pull
up and park beneath the oak tree again. Same spot as yesterday. Clem barked a greeting
at her car door, tail wagging, and he saw Allie wave from inside the car.
She stepped out, patted Clem on the head while she cooed at her, then turned, smiling
at Noah as he walked toward her. She looked more relaxed than yesterday, more confident,
and again he felt a slight shock at seeing her. It was different from yesterday,
though. Newer feelings now, not simply memories anymore. If anything, his attraction
for her had grown stronger overnight, more intense, and it made him feel a little
nervous in her presence.
99
Allie met him halfway, carrying a small bag in one hand. She surprised him by kissing
him gently on the cheek, her free hand lingering at his waist after she pulled back.
"Hi," she said, radiance in her eyes, "where's the surprise?"
He relaxed a little, thanking God for that. "Not even a 'Good afternoon' or 'How
was your night?'"
She smiled. Patience had never been one of her strongest attributes.
"Fine. Good afternoon. How was your night? And where's the surprise?"
He chuckled lightly, then paused. "Allie, I've
got some bad news."
"What?"
"I was going to take you someplace, but with those clouds coming in, I'm not sure
we should go."
"Why?"
"The storm. We'll be outside and might get
wet. Besides, there might be lightning." "It's not raining yet. How far is it?" "Up
the creek about a mile."
"And I've never been there before?"
"Not when it was like this."
She thought for a second while she looked around. When she spoke, her voice was determined.
"Then we'll go. I don't care if it rains." "are you sure?"
100
"Absolutely."
He looked at the clouds again, noting their approach. "Then we'd better go now,"
he said. "Can I bring that in for you?"
She nodded, handing her bag to him, and he jogged to the house and brought it inside,
where he placed it on a chair in the living room. Then he grabbed some bread and
put it in a bag, bringing it with him as he left the house.
They walked to the canoe, Allie beside him. A little closer than yesterday.
"What exactly is this place?"
"You'll see."
"You're not even going to give me a hint?" "Well," he said, "do you remember when
we took the canoe out and watched the sun come up?"
"I thought about it this morning. I remember it made me cry."
"What you're going to see today makes what you saw then seem ordinary."
"I guess I should feel special."
He took a few steps before responding.
"You are special," he finally said, and the way he said it made her wonder if he
wanted to add something else. But he didn't, and Allie smiled a little before glancing
away. As she did, she felt the wind in her face and noticed it had picked up since
the morning.
They reached the dock a moment later. After tossing the bag in the canoe, Noah quickly
101
checked to make sure he hadn't missed anything,
then slid the canoe to the water. "Can I do anything?" "No, just get in."
After she climbed in, he pushed the canoe farther into the water, close to the dock.
Then he gracefully stepped off the dock into the canoe, placing his feet carefully
to prevent the canoe from capsizing. Allie was impressed by his agility, knowing
that what he had done so quickly and easily was harder than it looked.
Allie sat at the front of the canoe, facing backward. He had said something about
missing the view when he started to paddle, but she'd shak-
en her head, saying she was fine the way she was. And it was true.
She could see everything she really wanted to see if she turned her head, but most
of all she wanted to watch Noah. It was him she'd come to see, not the creek. His
shirt was unbuttoned at the top, and she could see his chest muscles flex with every
stroke. His sleeves' were rolled up, too, and she could see the muscles in his arms
bulging slightly. His muscles were well developed there from paddling every morning.
Artistic, she thought. There's something almost artistic about him when he does this.
Something natural, as if being on the water were beyond his control, part of a gene
passed on to him from some obscure hereditary pool. When she watched him, she was
reminded of how the
lol
102
early explorers must have looked when they'd first discovered this area.
She couldn't think of anyone else who remotely resembled him. He was complicated,
almost contradictory in so many ways, yet simple, a strangely erotic combination.
On the surface he was a country boy, home from war, and he probably saw himself in
those terms. Yet there was so much more to him. Perhaps it was the poetry that made
him different, or perhaps it was the values his father had instilled in him, growing
up. Either way, he seemed to savor life more fully than others appeared to, and that
was what had first attracted her to him.
"What are you thinking?"
She felt her insides jump just a bit as Noah's voice brought her back to the present.
She realized she hadn't said much since they'd started, and she appreciated the silence
he had allowed her. He'd always been considerate like that.
"Good things," she answered quietly, and she saw in his eyes that he knew she was
thinking about him. She liked the fact that he knew it, and she hoped he had been
thinking about her as well.
She understood then that something was stirring within her, as it had so many years
ago. Watching him, watching his body move, made her feel it. And as their eyes lingered
for a second, she felt the heat in her neck and breasts, and she flushed, turning
away before he noticed.
103
"How much farther?" she asked.
"Another half mile or so. Not any more than that."
A pause. Then, she said: "It's pretty out here. So clean. So quiet. It's almost like
going back in time."
"In a way it is, I think. The creek flows from the forest. There's not a single farm
between here and where it starts, and the water is pure as rain. It's probably as
pure as it's ever been."
She leaned toward him. "Tell me, Noah, what do you remember most from the summer
we
spent together?"
"All of it."
"Anything in particular?"
"No," he said.
"You don't remember?"
He answered after a moment, quietly, seriously. "No, it's not that. It's not what
you're thinking. I was serious when I said 'all of it.' I can remember every moment
we were together, and in each of them there was something wonderful. I can't really
pick any one time that meant more than any other. The entire summer was perfect,
the kind of summer everyone should have. How could I pick one moment over another?
"Poets often describe love as an emotion that we can't control, one that overwhelms
logic and common sense. That's what it was like for me. I didn't plan on falling
in love with you, and I doubt if you planned on falling in love with me.
104
But once we met, it was clear that neither of us could control what was happening
to us. We fell in love, despite our differences, and once we did, something rare
and beautiful was created. For me, love like that has happened only once, and that's
why every minute we spent together has been seared in my memory. I'll never forget
a single moment of it."
Allie stared at him. No one had ever said anything like that to her before. Ever.
She didn't know what to say and stayed silent, her face hot.
"I'm sorry if I made you feel uncomfortable, Allie. I didn't mean to. But that summer
has stayed with me and probably always will. I know it can't be the same between
us, but that doesn't
change the way I felt about you then."
She spoke quietly, feeling warm.
"It didn't make me uncomfortable, Noah .... It's just that I don't ever hear things
like that. What you said was beautiful. It takes a poet to talk the way you do, and
like I said, you're the only poet I've ever met."
Peaceful silence descended on them. An osprey cried somewhere in the distance. A
mullet splashed near the bank. The paddle moved rhythmically, causing baffles that
rocked the boat ever so slightly. The breeze had stopped, and the clouds grew blacker
as the canoe moved toward some unknown destination.
Allie noticed it all, every sound, every thought. Her senses had come alive, invigorating
105
her, and she felt her mind drifting through the last few weeks. She thought about
the anxiety coming here had caused her. The shock at seeing the article, the sleepless
nights, her short temper during daylight. Even yesterday she had been afraid and
wanted to run away. The tension was gone now, every bit of it, replaced by something
else, and she was glad about that as she rode in silence in the old red canoe.
She felt strangely satisfied that she'd come, pleased that Noah had turned into the
type of man she'd thought he would, pleased that she would live forever with that
knowledge. She had seen too many men in the past few years destroyed by war, or time,
or even money. It took strength to hold on to inner passion, and Noah had done that.
This was a worker's world, not a poet's, and people would have a hard time understanding
Noah. America was in full swing now, all the papers said so, and people were rushing
forward, leaving behind the horrors of war. She understood the reasons, but they
were rushing, like Lon, toward long hours and profits, neglecting the things that
brought beauty to the world.
Who did she know in Raleigh who took time off to fix a house? Or read Whitman or
Eliot, finding images in the mind, thoughts of the spirit? Or hunted dawn from the
bow of a canoe? These weren't the things that drove society, but
106
she felt they shouldn't be treated as unimportant. They made living worthwhile.
To her it was the same with art, though she had realized it only upon coming here.
Or rather, remembered it. She had known it once before, and again she cursed herself
for forgetting something as important as creating beauty. Painting was what she was
meant to do, she was sure of that now. Her feelings this morning had confirmed it,
and she knew that whatever happened, she was going to give it another shot. A fair
shot, no matter what anyone said.
Would Lon encourage her painting? She remembered showing him one of her paintings
a couple of months after they had first started going out. It was an abstract painting
and was meant to inspire thought. In a way, it resembled the painting above Noah's
fireplace, the one Noah understood completely, though it may have been a touch less
passionate. Lon had stared at it, studied it almost, and then had asked her what
it was supposed to be. She hadn't bothered to answer.
She shook her head then, knowing she wasn't being completely fair. She loved Lon,
and always had, for other reasons. Though he wasn't Noah, Lon was a good man, the
kind of man she'd always known she would marry. With Lon there would be no surprises,
and there was comfort in knowing what the future would bring. He would be a kind
husband to her, and she would be a
107
good wife. She would have a home near friends and family, children, a respectable
place in society. It was the kind of life she'd always expected to live, the kind
of life she wanted to live. And though she wouldn't describe theirs as a passionate
relationship, she had convinced herself long ago that this wasn't necessary to be
fulfilled in a relationship, even with a person she intended to marry. Passion would
fade in time, and things like companionship and compatibility would take its place.
She and Lon had this, and she had assumed this was all she needed.
But now, as she watched Noah rowing, she questioned this basic assumption. He exuded
sexuality in everything he did, everything he was, and she caught herself thinking
about him in a way that an engaged woman shouldn't. She tried not to stare and glanced
away often, but the easy way he moved his body made it hard to keep her eyes from
him for long.
"Here we are," Noah said as he guided the canoe toward some trees near the bank.
Allie looked around, not seeing anything. "Where is it?"
"Here," he said again, pointing the canoe at an old tree that had fallen over, obscuring
an opening almost completely hidden from view.
He guided the canoe around the tree, and both of them had to lower their heads to
keep from bumping them.
"Close your eyes," he whispered, and Allie
108
did, bringing her hands to her face. She heard the baffles of the water and felt
the movement of the canoe as he propelled it forward, away from the pull of the creek.
"Okay," he finally said after he'd stopped paddling. "You can open them now."
109
sat in the middle of a small lake fed by the waters of Brices Creek. It wasn't large,
maybe a hundred yards across, and she was surprised at how invisible it had been
just moments before.
It was spectacular. Tundra swan and Canada geese literally surrounded them. Thousands
of them. Birds floating so close' together in some places that she couldn't see the
water. From a distance, the groups of swans looked almost like icebergs.
"Oh, Noah," she finally said softly, "it's beautiful.''
They sat in silence for a long while, watching the birds. Noah pointed out a group
of chicks, recently hatched, following a pack of geese near the shore, struggling
to keep up.
110
The air was filled with honking and chirping as Noah moved the canoe through the
water. The birds ignored them for the most part. The only ones who seemed bothered
were those forced to move when the canoe approached them. Allie reached out to touch
the closest ones and felt their feathers ruffling under her fingers.
Noah brought out the bag of bread he'd brought earlier and handed it to Allie. She
scattered the bread, favoring the little ones, laughing and smiling as they swam
in circles, looking for food.
They stayed until thunder boomed in the dis-tance--faint but powerful--and both of
them knew it was time to leave.
Noah led them back to the current of the creek, paddling stronger than he had earlier.
She
was still amazed by what she had seen. "Noah, what are they doing here?"
"I don't know. I know the swans from up north migrate to Lake Matamuskeet every winter,
but I guess they came here this time. I don't know why. Maybe the early blizzard
had something to do with it. Maybe they got off track or
something. They'll find their way back, though." "They won't stay?"
"I doubt it. They're driven by instinct, and this isn't their place. Some of the
geese may winter here, but the swans will go back to Matamuskeet."
Noah paddled hard as dark clouds rolled
111
directly overhead. Soon rain began to fall, a light sprinkle at first, then gradually
harder. Lightning 樊. a pause.., then thunder again. A little louder now. Maybe six
or seven miles away. More rain as Noah began to paddle even harder, his
muscles tightening with every stroke. Thicker drops now. Falling...
Falling with the wind...
Falling hard and thick . . . Noah rowing . . . racing the sky.., still getting wet..,
cursing to himself.., losing to Mother Nature...
The downpour was steady now, and Allie watched the rain fall diagonally from the
sky, trying to defy gravity as it rode on westerly winds that whistled over the trees.
The sky darkened a little more, and big heavy drops fell from the clouds. Hurricane
drops.
Allie enjoyed the rain and leaned her head back for a moment to let it hit her face.
She knew the front of her dress would soak through in a couple of minutes, but she
'didn't care. She did wonder, though, if he noticed, then thought he probably did.
She ran her hands through her hair, feeling its wetness. It felt wonderful, she felt
wonderful, everything felt wonderful. Even through the rain, she could hear him breathing
hard and the sound aroused her sexually in a way she hadn't felt in years.
A cloud burst directly above them, and the
112
rain began to come down even harder. Harder than she'd ever seen it. Allie looked
upward and laughed, giving up any attempt at keeping dry, making Noah feel better.
He hadn't known how she was feeling about it. Even though she'd made the decision
to come, he doubted that she'd expected to be caught in a storm like this.
They reached the dock a couple of minutes later, and Noah moved in close enough for
Allie to step out. He helped her up, then got out himself and dragged the canoe up
the bank far enough not to drift away. Just in case, he tied it to the dock, knowing
another minute in the rain wouldn't make any difference.
As he was tying the canoe, he looked up at Allie and stopped breathing for just a
second. She was incredibly beautiful as she waited, watching him, completely comfortable
in the rain. She didn't try to keep dry or hide herself, and he could see the outline
of her breasts as they pressed through the fabric of the dress that clung tightly
to her body. It wasn't a cold rain, but he could see her nipples erect and protruding,
hard like little rocks. He felt his loins begin to stir and quickly turned away,
embarrassed, muttering to himself, glad the rain muffled any sound of it. When he
finished and stood, Allie took his hand in hers, surprising him. Despite the downpour,
they didn't rush toward the house, and Noah imagined what it would be like to spend
the night with her.
113
Allie, too, was wondering about him. She felt the warmth in his hands and wondered
what it would be like to have them touch her body, feeling all of her, lingering
slowly across her skin. Just thinking about it made her take a deep breath, and she
felt her nipples begin to tingle and a new warmth between her legs.
She realized then that something had changed since she'd come here. And although
she couldn't pinpoint the exact time--yesterday after dinner, or this afternoon in
the canoe, or when they saw the swans, or maybe even now as they walked holding hands--she
knew that she had fallen in love with Noah Taylor Calhoun again, and that maybe,
just maybe, she had never stopped.
There was no uneasiness between them as they reached the door and both of them went
inside, pausing in the foyer, clothes dripping. "Did you bring a change of clothes?"
She shook her head, still feeling the roll of emotions within her, wondering if it
showed on her face.
"I think I can find something here for you so you can get out of those clothes. It
might be a little big, but it's warm."
"Anything," she said.
"I'll be back in a second."
Noah slipped off his boots, then ran up the stairs, descending a minute later. He
had a pair of cotton pants and a long-sleeved shirt under one
114
arm and some jeans with a blue shirt in the other.
"Here," he said, handing her the cotton pants and shirt. "You can change in the bedroom
upstairs. There's a bathroom and towel up there too if you want to shower."
She thanked him with a smile and went up the stairs, feeling his eyes on her as she
walked. She entered the bedroom and closed the door, then set the pants and shirt
on his bed and peeled everything off. Naked, she went to his closet and found a hanger,
put her dress, bra, and panties on it, and then went to hang it in the bathroom so
it wouldn't drip on the hardwood floor. She felt a secret thrill at being naked in
the same room he slept in.
She didn't want to shower after being in the rain. She liked the soft feeling on
her skin, and it reminded her of how people used to live long ago. Naturally. Like
Noah. She slipped on his clothes before looking at herself in the mirror. The pants
were big, but tucking in the shirt helped, and she rolled up the bottoms just a little
so they wouldn't drag. The neck was torn a little and it nearly hung off one shoulder,
but she liked the way it looked on her anyway. She pulled the sleeves up almost to
the elbows, went to the bureau, and slipped on some socks, then went to the bathroom
to find a hairbrush.
She brushed her wet hair just enough to get out the snarls, letting it rest on her
shoulders. Looking in the mirror, she wished she had
115
brought a clasp or a couple of hairpins.
And a little more mascara. But what could she do? Her eyes still had a little of
what she'd put on earlier, and she touched up with a washcloth, doing the best she
could.
When she was finished, she checked herself in the mirror, feeling pretty despite
everything, and went back down the stairs.
Noah was in the living room squatting before a fire, doing his best to coax it to
life. He didn't see her come in, and she watched him as he worked. He had changed
his clothes as well and looked good: his shoulders broad, wet hair hanging just over
his collar, jeans tight.
He poked the fire, moving the logs, and added some more kindling. Allie leaned against
the doorjamb, one leg crossed over the other, and continued to watch him. In a few
minutes the fire had turned to flames, even and steady. He turned to the side to
straighten the remaining unused logs and caught a glimpse of her out of the corner
of his eye. He turned back to her quickly.
Even in his clothes she looked beautiful. After a moment he turned away shyly, going
back to stacking the logs.
"I didn't hear you come in," he said, trying to sound casual.
"I know. You weren't supposed to." She knew what he had been thinking and felt a
tinge of amusement at how young he seemed.
"How long have you been standing there?"
116
"A couple of minutes."
Noah brushed his hands on his pants, then pointed to the kitchen. "Can I get you
some tea? I started the water while you were upstairs." Small talk, anything to keep
his mind clear. But damn, the way she looked...
She thought for a second, saw the way he was looking at her, and felt the old instincts
take over.
"Do you have anything stronger, or is it too early to drink?"
He smiled. "I have some bourbon in the pantry. Is that okay?"
"That sounds great."
He started toward the kitchen, and Allie watched him run his hand through his wet
hair as he disappeared.
Thunder boomed loudly, and another downpour started. Allie could hear the roaring
of the rain on the roof, could hear the snapping of logs as the flickering flames
lit the room. She turned to the window and saw the gray sky flash lighter for just
a second. Moments later, another boom of thunder. Close this time.
She took a quilt from the sofa and sat on the rug in front of the fire. Crossing
her legs, she adjusted the quilt until she was comfortable and watched the dancing
flames. Noah came back, saw what she had done, and went to sit beside her. He put
down two glasses and poured some bourbon into each of them. Outside, the sky grew
darker.
Thunder again. Loud. The storm in full fury,
117
winds whipping the rain in circles.
"It's quite a storm," Noah said as he watched the drops flow in vertical streams
on the windows. He and Allie were close now, though not touching, and Noah watched
her chest rise slightly with every breath, imagining the feel of her body once again
before fighting it back.
"I like it," she said, taking a sip. "I've always liked thunderstorms. Even as a
young girl."
"Why?" Saying anything, keeping his balance.
"I don't know. They just always seemed romantic to me."
She was quiet for a moment, and Noah watched the fire flicker in her emerald eyes.
Then she said, "Do you remember sitting together and
watching the storm a few nights before I left?" "Of course."
"I used to think about it all the time after I went home. I always thought about
how you looked that night. It was the way I always remembered you."
"Have I changed much?"
She took another sip of bourbon, feeling it warm her. She touched his hand as she
answered.
"Not really. Not in the things that I remember. You're older, of course, with more
life behind you, but you've still got the same gleam in your eye. You still read
poetry and float on rivers. And you've still got a gentleness that not even the war
could take away."
He thought about what she'd said and felt her
118
hand lingering on his, her thumb tracing slow circles.
"Allie, you asked me earlier what I remembered most about the summer. What do you
remember?"
It was a while before she answered. Her voice seemed to come from somewhere else.
"I remember making love. That's what I remember most. You were my first, and it was
more wonderful than I ever thought it would be."
Noah took a drink of bourbon, remembering, bringing back the old feelings again,
then suddenly shook his head. This was already hard enough. She went on.
"I remember being so afraid beforehand that I was trembling, but at the same time
being so excited. I'm glad you were the first. I'm glad we
were able to share that."
"Me too."
"Were you as afraid as I was?"
Noah nodded without speaking, and she smiled at his honesty.
"I thought so. You were always shy like that. Especially in the beginning. I remember
you had asked if I had a boyfriend, and when I said I did, you barely talked to me
anymore."
"I didn't want to get between the two of you." "You did, though, in the end, despite
your professed innocence," she said, smiling. "And I'm glad you did."
"When did you finally tell him about us?"
119
"After I got home."
"Was it hard?"
"Not at all. I was in love with you."
She squeezed his hand, let go, and moved closer. She put her hand through his arm,
cradling it, and rested her head on his shoulder. He could smell her, soft like the
rain, warm. She spoke quietly:
"Do you remember walking home after the festival? I asked you if you wanted to see
me again. You just nodded your head and didn't say a word. It wasn't too convincing."
"I'd never met anyone like you before. I couldn't help it. I didn't know what to
say."
"I know. You could never hide anything. Your eyes always gave you away. You had the
most wonderful eyes I'd ever seen."
She paused then, lifted her head from his shoulder, and looked directly at him. When
she spoke, her voice was barely above a whisper. "I think I loved you more that summer
than I ever loved anyone."
Lightning flashed again. In the quiet moments before the thunder, their eyes met
as they tried to undo the fourteen years, both of them sensing a change since yesterday.
When the thunder finally sounded, Noah sighed and turned from her, toward the windows.
"I wish you could have read the letters I wrote you," he said.
She didn't speak for a long while.
120
"It wasn't just up to you, Noah. I didn't tell you, but I wrote you a dozen letters
after I got home. I just never sent them."
"Why?" Noah was surprised. "I guess I was too afraid." "Of what?"
"That maybe it wasn't as real as I thought it was. That maybe you forgot me."
"I would never do that. I couldn't even think it."
"I know that now. I can see it when I look at you. But back then, it was different.
There was so much I didn't understand, things that a young
girl's mind couldn't sort out."
"What do you mean?"
She paused, collecting her thoughts.
"When your letters never came, I didn't know what to think. I remember talking to
my best friend about what happened that summer, and she said that you got what you
wanted, and that she wasn't surprised that you wouldn't write. I didn't believe that
you were that way, I never did, but hearing it and thinking about all our differences
made me wonder if maybe the summer meant more to me than it had meant to you ....
And then, while all this was going through my head, I heard from Sarah. She said
that you had left New Bern."
"Fin and Sarah always knew where I was--"
She held up her hand to stop him. "I know, but I never asked. I assumed that you
had left
121
New Bern to start a new life, one without me. Why else wouldn't you write? Or call?
Or come
see
Noah looked away without answering, and she continued:
"I didn't know, and in time, the hurt began to fade and it was easier to just let
it go. At least I thought it was. But in every boy I met in the next few years, I
found myself looking for you, and when the feelings got too strong, I'd write you
another letter. But I never sent them for fear of what I might find. By then, you'd
gone on with your life and I didn't want to think about you loving someone else.
I wanted to remember us like we were that summer. I didn't want to ever lose that."
She said it so sweetly, so innocently, that Noah wanted to kiss her when she finished.
But he didn't. Instead he fought the urge and pushed it back, knowing it wasn't what
she needed. Yet she felt so wonderful to him, touching him ....
"The last letter I wrote was a couple of years ago. After I met Lon, I wrote to your
daddy to find out where you were. But it had been so long since I'd seen you, I wasn't
even sure he'd still be there. And with the war..."
She trailed off, and they were quiet for a moment, both of them lost in thought.
Lightning lit the sky again before Noah finally broke the silence.
"I wish you would have mailed it anyway."
122
"Why?"
"Just to hear from you. To hear what you've been up to."
"You might have been disappointed. My life isn't too exciting. Besides, I'm not exactly
what you remembered."
"You're better than I remembered, Allie." "You're sweet, Noah."
He almost stopped there, knowing that if he kept the words inside him, he could somehow
keep control, the same control he had kept the past fourteen years. But something
else had overtaken him now, and he gave in to it, hoping somehow, in some way, it
would take them back to what they'd had so long ago.
"I'm not saying it because I'm sweet. I'm saying it because I love you now and I
always have. More than you can imagine."
A log snapped, sending sparks up the chimney, and both of them noticed the smoldering
remains, almost burned through. The fire needed another log, but neither of them
moved.
Allie took another sip of bourbon and began to feel its effects. But it wasn't just
the alcohol that made her hold Noah a little tighter and feel his warmth against
her. Glancing out the window, she saw the clouds were almost black.
"Let me get the fire going again," Noah said, needing to think, and she released
him. He went to the fireplace, opened the screen, and added a couple of logs. He
used the poker to adjust the
123
burning wood, making sure the new wood could catch easily.
The flame began to spread again, and Noah returned to her side. She snuggled up against
him again, resting her head on his shoulder as she had before, not speaking, rubbing
her hand lightly against his chest. Noah leaned closer and whispered in her ear.
"This reminds me of how we once were. When we were young."
She smiled, thinking the same thing, and they watched the fire and smoke, holding
each other.
"Noah, you've never asked, but I want you to
know something."
"What is it?"
Her voice was tender.
"There's never been another, Noah. You weren't just the first. You're the only man
I've ever been with. I don't expect you to say the same thing, but I wanted you to
know."
Noah was silent as he turned away. She felt warmer as she watched the fire. Her hand
ran over the muscles beneath his shirt, hard and firm as they leaned against each
other.
She remembered when they'd held each other like this for what they'd thought would
be the last time. They were sitting on a sea wall designed to hold back the waters
of the Neuse River. She was crying because they might never see each other again,
and she wondered how she could ever be happy again. Instead of answering,
124
he pressed a note into her hand, which she read on the way home. She had saved it,
occasionally reading all of it or sometimes just a part. One part she'd read at least
a hundred times, and for some reason it ran through her head now. It said:
The reason it hurts so much to separate is because our souls are connected. Maybe
they always have been and will be. Maybe we've lived a thousand lives before this
one and in each of them we've found each other. And maybe each time, we've been forced
apart for the same reasons. That means that this good-bye is both a goodbye for the
past ten thousand years and a prelude to what will come.
When I look at you, I see your beauty and grace and know they have grown stronger
with every life you have lived. And I know I have spent every life before this one
searching for you. Not someone like you, but you, for your soul and mine must always
come together. And then, for a reason neither of us understands, we've been forced
to say good-bye.
I would love to tell you that everything will work out for us, and I promise to do
all I can to make sure it does. But if we never meet again and this is truly good-bye,
I know we will see each other again in another life. We will find each other again,
125
and maybe the stars will have changed, and we will not only love each other in that
time, but for all the times we've had before.
Could it be? she wondered. Could he be right? She had never completely discounted
it, wanting to hold on to its promise in case it was true. The idea had helped her
through many hard times. But sitting here now seemed to test the theory that they
were destined to always be apart. Unless the stars had changed since they were last
together.
And maybe they had, but she didn't want to look. Instead she leaned into him and
felt the heat between them, felt his body, felt his arm tight around her. And her
body began to tremble with the same anticipation she had felt the first time they
were together.
It felt so right to be here. Everything felt right. The fire, the drinks, the storm--it
couldn't have been more perfect. Like magic, it seemed, their years apart didn't
matter anymore.
Lightning cut the sky outside. Fire danced on white-hot wood, spreading the heat.
October rain sheeted itself against the windows, drowning out all other sounds.
They gave in then to everything they had fought the last fourteen years. Allie lifted
her head off his shoulder, looked at him with hazy eyes, and Noah kissed her softly
on the lips. She brought her hand to his face and touched his
126
cheek, brushing it softly with her fingers. He leaned in slowly and kissed her again,
still soft and tender, and she kissed back, feeling the years of separation dissolve
into passion.
She closed her eyes and parted her lips as he ran his fingers up and down her arms,
slowly, lightly. He kissed her neck, her cheek, her eyelids, and she felt the moisture
of his mouth linger wherever his lips had touched. She took his hand and led it to
her breasts, and a whimper rose in her throat as he gently touched them through the
thin fabric of the shirt.
The world seemed dreamlike as she pulled back from him, the firelight setting her
face aglow. Without speaking, she started to undo the buttons on his shirt. He watched
her as she did it and listened to her soft breaths as she made her way downward.
With each button he could feel her fingers brushing against his skin, and she smiled
softly at him when she finally finished. He felt her slide her hands inside, touching
him as lightly as possible, letting her hands explore his body. He was hot and she
ran her hand over his slightly wet chest, feeling his hair between her fingers. Leaning
in, she kissed his neck gently as she pulled the shirt over his shoulders, locking
his arms behind his back. She lifted her head and allowed him to kiss her as he rolled
his shoulders, freeing himself from the sleeves.
With that, he slowly reached for her. He lifted her shirt and ran his finger slowly
across her
127
belly before raising her arms and slipping it off. She felt short of breath as he
lowered his head and kissed between her breasts and slowly ran his tongue up to her
neck. His hands gently caressed her back, her arms, her shoulders, and she felt their
heated bodies press together, skin to skin. He kissed her neck and nibbled gently
as she lifted her hips and allowed him to pull off her bottoms. She reached for the
snap on his jeans, undid it, and watched as he slipped them off as well. It was almost
slow motion as their naked bodies finally came together, both of them trembling with
the memory of what they had once shared together.
He ran his tongue along her neck while his hands moved over the smooth hot skin of
her breasts, down her belly, past her navel, and up again. He was struck by her beauty.
Her shimmering hair trapped the light and made it sparkle. Her skin was soft and
beautiful, almost glowing in the firelight. He felt her hands on his back, beckoning
him.
They lay back, close to the fire, and the heat made the air seem thick. Her back
was slightly arched as he rolled atop her in one fluid motion. He was on all fours
above her, his knees astride her hips. She lifted her head and kissed his chin and
neck, breathing hard, licking his shoulders, and tasting the sweat that lingered
on his body. She ran her hands through his hair as he held himself above her, his
arm muscles hard from the
128
exertion. With a little tempting frown, she pulled him closer, but he resisted. Instead
he lowered himself and lightly rubbed his chest against her, and she felt her body
respond with anticipation. He did this slowly, over and over, kissing every part
of her body, listening as she made soft, whimpering sounds while he moved above her.
He did this until she couldn't take it anymore, and when they finally joined as one,
she cried aloud and pressed her fingers hard into his back. She buried her face in
his neck and felt him deep inside her, felt his strength and gentleness, felt his
muscle and his soul. She moved rhythmically against him, allowing him to take her
wherever he wanted, to the place she was meant to be.
She opened her eyes and watched him in the firelight, marveling at his beauty as
he moved above her. She saw his body glisten with crystal sweat and watched as beads
rolled down his chest and fell onto her like the rain outside. And with every drop,
with every breath, she felt herself, every responsibility, every facet of her life,
slipping away.
Their bodies reflected everything given, everything taken, and she was rewarded with
a sensation she never knew existed. It went on and on, tingling throughout her body
and warming her before finally subsiding, and she struggled to catch her breath while
she trembled beneath him. But the moment it was over, another one started to build
again, and she started to feel
129
them in long sequences, one right after the next. By the time the rain had stopped
and the sun had set, her body was exhausted but unwilling to stop the pleasure between
them.
They spent the day in each other's arms, alternately making love by the fire and
then holding each other as they watched the flames curl around the wood. Sometimes
he recited one of his favorite poems as she lay beside him, and she would listen
with her eyes closed and almost feel the words. Then, when they were ready, they
would join again and he murmured words of love between kisses as they wrapped their
arms around one another.
They went on throughout the evening, making up for their years apart, and slept in
each other's arms that night. Occasionally he would wake up and look at her, her
body spent and radiant, and feel as if everything were suddenly right in this world.
Once, when he was looking at her in the moments before daybreak, her eyes fluttered
open and she smiled and reached up to touch his face. He put his fingers to her lips,
gently, to keep her from speaking, and for a long time they just looked at one another.
When the lump in his throat subsided, he whispered to her, "You are the answer to
every prayer I've offered. You are a song, a dream, a whisper, and I don't know how
I could have lived without you for as long as I have. I love
130
you, Allie, more than you can ever imagine. I always have, and I always will."
"Oh, Noah," she said, pulling him to her. She wanted him, needed him now more than
ever, like nothing she'd ever known.
131 our roo s
Later that morning, three men--two lawyers and the judge--sat in chambers while Lon
finished speaking. It was a moment before the judge answered.
"It's an unusual request," he said, pondering the situation. "It seems to me the
trial could very well end today. Are you saying this urgent matter can't wait until
later this evening or tomorrow
?
"No, Your Honor, it can't," Lon answered almost too quickly. Stay relaxed, he told
himself. Take a deep breath.
"And it has nothing to do with this case?" "No, Your Honor. It's of a personal nature.
I know it's out of the ordinary, but I really need to take care of it." Good, better.
The judge leaned back in his chair, evaluating
132
him for a moment. "Mr. Bates, how do you feel about this?"
He cleared his throat. "Mr. Hammond called me this morning and I've already spoken
to my clients. They're willing to postpone until Monday."
"I see," the judge said. "And do you believe it is in your clients' best interests
to do this?"
"I believe so," he said. "Mr. Hammond has agreed to reopen discussion on a certain
matter not covered by this proceeding."
The judge looked hard at both of them and thought about it.
"I don't like it," he finally said, "not at all. But Mr. Hammond has never made a
similar request before, and I assume the matter is very important to him."
He paused for effect, then looked to some papers on his desk. "I'll agree to adjourn
until Monday. Nine o'clock sharp."
"Thank you, Your Honor," Lon said.
Two minutes later he was leaving the courthouse. He walked to the car he had parked
directly across the street, got in, and began the drive to New Bern, his hands shaking.
133 n nexpected伴sitor
Nah made breakfast for Allie while she slept in the living room. Bacon, biscuits,
and coffee, nothing spectacular. He set the tray beside her as she woke up, and as
soon as they had finished eating, they made love again. It was relentless, a powerful
confirmation of what they had shared the day before. Allie arched her back and cried
out fiercely in the final tidal wave of sensations, then wrapped her arms around
him as they breathed in unison, exhausted.
They showered together, and afterward Allie put on her dress, which had dried overnight.
She spent the morning with Noah. Together they fed Clem and checked the windows to
make sure no damage had been done in the storm. Two pine trees had blown over, though
neither had caused much damage, and a few shingles had blown off
134
the shed, but other than that, the property had escaped pretty much unscathed.
He held her hand most of the morning and the two talked easily, but sometimes he
would stop speaking and just stare at her. When he did, she felt as though she should
say something, but nothing meaningful ever came into her head. Lost in thought, she
usually just kissed him.
A little before noon, Noah and Allie went in to prepare lunch. Both of them were
starving again because they hadn't eaten much the day before. Using what he had on
hand, they fried some chicken and baked another batch of biscuits, and the two of
them ate on the porch, serenaded by a mockingbird.
While they were inside doing the dishes, they heard a knock at the door. Noah left
Allie in the kitchen.
Knock again.
"I'm coming," Noah said. Knock, knock. Louder. He approached the door. Knock, knock.
"I'm coming," he said again as he opened the door.
"Oh, my God."
He stared for a moment at a beautiful woman in her early fifties, a woman he would
have recognized anywhere.
Noah couldn't speak.
"Hello, Noah," she finally said.
135
Noah said nothing.
"May I come in?" she asked, her voice steady, revealing nothing.
He stammered out a reply as she walked past him, stopping just before the stairs.
"Who is it?" Allie shouted from the kitchen, and the woman turned at the sound of
her voice.
"It's your mother," Noah finally answered, and immediately after he said it, he heard
the sound of breaking glass.
"I knew you would be here," Anne Nelson said to her daughter as the three of them
sat
around the coffee table in the living room. "How could you be so sure?"
"You're my daughter. One day when you have kids of your own, you'll know the answer."
She smiled, but her manner was stiff, and Noah imagined how difficult this must be
for her. "I saw the article, too, and I saw your reaction. I also saw how tense you've
been during the last couple of weeks, and when you said you were going shopping near
the coast, I knew exactly what you meant."
"What about Daddy?"
Anne Nelson shook her head. "No, I didn't tell your father or anyone else about it.
Nor did I tell anyone where I was going today."
The table was silent for a moment as they wondered what was coming next, but Anne
remained quiet.
136
"Why did you come?" Allie finally asked.
Her mother raised an eyebrow. "I thought I
would be the one to ask that question."
Allie paled.
"I came because I had to," her mother said, "which I'm sure is the same reason you
came. Am I right?"
Allie nodded.
Anne turned to Noah. "These last couple of days must have been full of surprises."
"Yes," he answered simply, and she smiled at him.
"I know you don't think so, but I always liked you, Noah. I just didn't think you
were right for my daughter. Can you understand that?"
He shook his head as he answered, his tone serious. "No, not really. It wasn't fair
to me, and it wasn't fair to Allie. Otherwise she wouldn't be here."
She watched him as he answered, but she said nothing. Allie, sensing an argument,
cut in: -
"What do you mean when you say you had to come? Don't you trust me?"
Anne turned back to her daughter. "This has nothing to do with trust. This has to
do with Lon. He called the house last night to talk to me about Noah, and he's on
his way here right now. He seemed very upset. I thought you'd want to know."
Allie inhaled sharply. "He's on his way?"
"As we speak. He arranged to have the trial
137
postponed until next week. If he's not in New Bern yet, he's close."
"What did you say to him?"
"Not much. But he knew. He had it all figured out. He remembered my telling him about
Noah a long time ago."
Allie swallowed hard. "Did you tell him I was here ?"
"No. And I won't. That's between you and him. But knowing him, I'm sure he'll find
you here if you stay. All it takes is a couple of phone calls to the right people.
After all, I was able to find you."
Allie, though obviously worried, smiled at her mother. "Thank you," she said, and
her mother reached for her hand.
"I know we've had our differences, Allie, and that we haven't seen eye to eye on
everything. I'm not perfect, but I did the best I could with raising you. I'm your
mother and I always will be. That means I'll always love you."
Allie was silent for a moment, then: "What should I do?"
"I don't know, Allie. That's up to you. But I would think about it. Think about what
you really want."
Allie turned away, her eyes reddening. A moment later a tear drifted down her cheek.
"I don't know... ," she trailed off, and her mother squeezed her hand. Anne looked
at Noah, who had been sitting with his head down,
138
listening carefully. As if on cue, he returned her gaze, nodded, and left the room.
When he was gone, Anne whispered, "Do you love him?"
"Yes, I do," Allie answered softly, "very much."
"Do you love Lon?"
"Yes, I do. I love him, too. Dearly, but in a different way. He doesn't make me feel
the way Noah does."
"No one will ever do that," her mother said, and she released Allie's hand.
"I can't make this decision for you, Allie, this one's all yours. I want you to know,
though, that I love you. And I always will. I know that doesn't help, but it's all
I can do."
She reached in her pocketbook and removed a bundle of letters held together with
string, the envelopes old and slightly yellowed.
"These are the letters that Noah wrote you. I never threw them away, and they haven't
been opened. I know I shouldn't have kept them from you, and I'm sorry for that.
But I was just trying to protect you. I didn't realize..."
Allie took them and ran her hand over them, shocked.
"I should go, Allie. You've got some decisions to make, and you don't have much time.
Do you want me to stay in town?"
Allie shook her head. "No, this is up to me." Anne nodded and watched her daughter
for a
139
moment, wondering. Finally she stood, went around the table, leaned over, and kissed
her daughter on the cheek. She could see the question in her daughter's eyes as Allie
stood from the table and embraced her.
"What are you going to do?" her mother asked, pulling back. There was a long pause.
"I don't know," Allie finally answered. They stood together for another minute, just
holding each other.
"Thanks for coming," Allie said. "I love you." "I love you, too." On her way out
the door, Allie thought that she heard her mother whisper, "Follow your heart," but
she couldn't be sure.
140 FOSSrOadS
Nah opened the door for Anne Nelson as she went out.
"Good-bye, Noah," she said quietly. He nodded without speaking. There wasn't anything
else to say; they both knew that. She turned from him and left, closing the door
behind her. Noah watched her walk to her car, get in, and drive away without looking
back. She was a strong woman, he thought to himself, and he knew where Allie got
it from.
Noah peeked in the living room, saw Allie sitting with her head down, then went to
the back porch, knowing that she needed to be alone. He sat quietly in his rocker
and watched the water drifting by as the minutes passed.
After what seemed like an eternity he heard the back door open. He didn't turn to
look at her
141
just then--for some reason he couldn't--and he listened as she sat in the chair beside
him.
"I'm sorry," Allie said. "I had no idea this would happen."
Noah shook his head. "Don't be sorry. We both knew it was coming in some form or
another."
"It's still hard."
"I know." He finally turned to her, reaching for her hand. "Is there anything I can
do to make it easier?"
She shook her head. "No. Not really. I have to do this alone. Besides, I'm not sure
what I'm going to say to him yet." She looked down and her voice became softer and
a little more distant, as if she were talking to herself. "I guess it depends on
him and how much he knows. If my mother was right, he may have suspicions, but he
doesn't know anything for sure."
Noah felt a tightness in his stomach. When he finally spoke his voice was steady,
but she could hear the pain in it.
"You're not going to tell him about us, are you ?"
"I don't know. I really don't. While I was in the living room, I kept asking myself
what I really wanted in my life." She squeezed his hand. "And do you know what the
answer was? The answer was that I wanted two things. First, I want you. I want us.
I love you and I always have."
142
She took a deep breath before going on.
"But I also want a happy ending without hurting anyone. And I know that if I stayed,
people would be hurt. Especially Lon. I wasn't lying when I told you that I love
him. He doesn't make me feel the same way you do, but I care for him, and this wouldn't
be fair to him. But staying here would also hurt my family and friends. I would
be betraying everyone I know I don't know
if I can do that."
"You can't live your life for other people. You've got to do what's right for you,
even if it hurts some people you love."
"I know," she said, "but no matter what I choose I have to live with it. Forever.
I have to be able to go forward and not look back anymore. Can you understand that?"
He shook his head and tried to keep his voice steady. "Not really. Not if it means
losing you. I can't do that again."
She didn't say anything but lowered her head. Noah went on:
"Could you really leave me without looking back?"
She bit her lip as she answered. Her voice was beginning to crack. "I don't know.
Probably not."
"Would that be fair to Lon?"
She didn't answer right away. Instead she stood, wiped her face, and walked to the
edge of the porch where she leaned against the post. She
143
crossed her arms and watched the water before
answering quietly.
"No."
"It doesn't have to be like this, Allie," he said. "We're adults now, we have the
choice we didn't have before. We're meant to be together. We always have been."
He walked to her side and put his hand on her shoulder. "I don't want to live the
rest of my life thinking about you and dreaming of what might have been. Stay with
me, Allie."
Tears began to fill her eyes. "I don't know if I can," she finally whispered.
"You can. Allie... I can't live my life happily knowing you're with someone else.
That would kill a part of me. What we have is rare. It's too beautiful to just throw
it away."
She didn't respond. After a moment he gently turned her toward him, took her hands,
and stared at her, willing her to look at him. Allie finally faced him with moist
eyes. After a long silence, Noah brushed the tears from her cheeks with his fingers,
a look of tenderness on his face. His voice caught as he saw what her eyes were telling
him.
"You're not going to stay, are you?" He smiled weakly. "You want to, but you can't."
"Oh, Noah," she said as the tears began
again, "please try to understand "
He shook his head to stop her.
"I know what you're trying to say--I can see
144
it in your eyes. But I don't want to understand it, Allie. I don't want it to end
this way. I don't want it to end at all. But if you leave, we both know we'll never
see each other again."
She leaned into him and began to cry harder as Noah fought back his own tears.
He wrapped his arms around her.
"Allie, I can't force you to stay with me. But no matter what happens in my life,
I'll never forget these last couple of days with you. I've been dreaming about this
for years."
He kissed her gently, and they embraced as they had when she first got out of her
car two days ago. Finally Allie let him go and wiped her tears.
"I have to get my things, Noah."
He didn't go inside with her. Instead he sat down in the rocker, spent. He watched
her go into the house and listened as the sound of her movements faded into nothing.
She emerged from the house minutes later with everything she'd brought and walked
toward him with her head down. She handed him the drawing she had done yesterday
morning. As he took it, he
noticed that she hadn't stopped crying.
"Here, Noah. I made this for you."
Noah took the drawing and unrolled it slowly, careful not to tear it.
There were dual images, one overlapping the other. The image in the foreground, which
occupied most of the page, was a picture of how he
145
looked now, not fourteen years ago. Noah noticed that she had penciled in every detail
of his face, including the scar. It was almost as if she'd copied it from a recent
photograph.
The second image was that of the front of the house. The detail there was also incredible,
as if she had sketched it while sitting beneath the oak tree.
"It's beautiful, Allie. Thank you." He attempted a smile. "I told you that you were
an artist." She nodded, her face cast downward, her lips pressed together. It was
time for her to go.
They walked to her car slowly, without speaking. When they reached it, Noah embraced
her again until he could feel the tears welling up in his own eyes. He kissed her
lips and both cheeks, then with his finger softly brushed the places he'd kissed.
"I love you, Allie."
"I love you, too."
Noah opened her car door, and they kissed one more time. Then she slid behind the
wheel, never taking her eyes from him. She put the packet of letters and the pocketbook
next to her on the seat and fumbled for the keys, then turned the ignition. It started
easily, and the engine began to turn over impatiently. It was almost time.
Noah pushed her door closed with both hands, and Allie rolled down the window. She
could see the muscles in his arms, the easy smile,
146
the tanned face. She reached out her hand and Noah took it for just a moment, moving
his fingers softly against her skin.
"Stay with me," Noah mouthed without sound, and this for some reason hurt more than
Allie would have expected. The tears began to fall hard now, but she couldn't speak.
Finally, reluctantly, she looked away and pulled her hand from his. She put the car
in gear and eased the pedal down just a bit. If she didn't leave now, she never would.
Noah backed up just a bit as the car started to roll away.
He fell into an almost trancelike state as he felt the reality of the situation.
He watched the car roll slowly forward; he heard the gravel crunching under the wheels.
Slowly the car began to turn from him, toward the road that would take her back to
town. Leaving--she was leaving!-and Noah felt dizzy at the sight.
Edging forward.., past him now...
She waved one last time without smiling before she began to accelerate, and he waved
back weakly. "Don't go!" he wanted to shout as the car moved farther away. But he
didn't say anything, and a minute later the car was gone and the only remaining signs
of her were the tracks that her car had left behind.
He stood there without moving for a long time. As quickly as she had come, she was
gone. Forever this time. Forever.
He closed his eyes then and watched her leave
147
once more, her car moving steadily away from him, taking his heart with her.
But, like her mother, he realized sadly, she never looked back.
148 fi tter from esterday
Diving with tears in her eyes was difficult, but she went on anyway, hoping that
instinct would take her back to the inn. She kept the window rolled down, thinking
the fresh air might help clear her mind, but it didn't seem to help. Nothing would
help.
She was tired, and she wondered if she would have the energy she needed to talk to
Lon. And what was she going to say? She still had no idea but hoped that something
would come to her
when the time came.
It would have to.
By the time she reached the drawbridge that led to Front Street, she had herself
a little more under control. Not completely, but well enough, she thought, to talk
to Lon. At least she hoped so.
Traffic was light, and she had time to watch
149
strangers going about their business as she drove through New Bern. At a gas station,
a mechanic was looking under the hood of a new automobile while a man, presumably
its owner, stood beside him. Two women were pushing baby carriages just outside Hoffman-Lane,
chatting between themselves while they window-shopped. In front of Hearns Jewelers,
a well-dressed man walked briskly, carrying a briefcase.
She made another turn and saw a young man unloading groceries from a truck that blocked
part of the street. Something about the way he held himself, or the way he moved,
reminded her of Noah harvesting crabs at the end of the dock.
She saw the inn just up the street while she was stopped at a red light. She took
a deep breath when the light turned green and drove slowly until she reached the
parking lot that the inn shared with a couple of other businesses. She turned in
and saw Lon's car sitting in the first spot. Although the one next to it was open,
she passed it and picked a spot a little farther from the entrance.
She turned the key, and the engine stopped promptly. Next she reached into the glove
compartment for a mirror and brush, finding both sitting on top of a map of North
Carolina. Looking at herself, she saw her eyes were still red and puffy. Like yesterday
after the rain, as she examined her reflection she was sorry she didn't have any
makeup, though she doubted it would
150
help much now. She tried pulling her hair back on one side, tried both sides, then
finally gave up.
She reached for her pocketbook, opened it, and once again looked at the article that
had brought her here. So much had happened since then; it was hard to believe it
had been only three weeks. It felt impossible to her that she had arrived only the
day before yesterday. It seemed like a lifetime since her dinner with Noah.
Starlings chirped in the trees around her. The clouds had begun to break up now,
and Allie could see blue in between patches of white. The sun was still shaded, but
she knew it would only be a matter of time. It was going to be a beautiful day.
It was the kind of day she would have liked to spend with Noah, and as she was thinking
about him, she remembered the letters her mother had givea her and reached for them.
She untied the packet and found the first letter he had written her. She began to
open it, then stopped because she could imagine what was in it. Something simple,
no doubt--things he'd done, memories of the summer, perhaps some questions. After
all, he probably expected an answer from her. Instead she reached for the last letter
he'd written, the one on the bottom of the stack. The good-bye letter. This one interested
her far more than the others. How had he said it? How would she have said it?
151
The envelope was thin. One, maybe two pages. Whatever he had written wasn't too long.
First, she turned it over and checked the back. No name, just a street address in
New Jersey. She held her breath as she used her fingernail to pry it open.
Unfolding it, she saw it was dated March 1935.
Two and a half years without a reply.
She imagined him sitting at an old desk, crafting the letter, somehow knowing this
was the end, and she saw what she thought were tearstains on the paper. Probably
just her imagination.
She straightened the page and began to read in the soft white sunlight that shone
through the window.
My dearest Allie,
I don't know what to say anymore except that ! couldn't sleep last night because
I knew that it is over between us. It is a different feeling for me, one that I never
expected, but looking back, I suppose it couldn't have ended another way.
You and I were different. We came from different worlds, and yet you were the one
who taught me the value of love. You showed me what it was like to care for another,
and I am a better man because of it. I don't want you to ever forget that.
152
I am not bitter because of what has happened. On the contrary. I am secure in knowing
that what we had was real, and I am happy we were able to come together for even
a short period of time. And if, in some distant place in the future, we see each
other in our new lives, I will smile at you with joy, and remember how we spent a
summer beneath the trees, learning from each other and growing in love. And maybe,
for a brief moment, you'll feel it too, and you'll smile back, and savor the
memories we will always share together. I love you, Allie. Noah
She read the letter again, more slowly this time, then read it a third time before
she put it back into the envelope. Once more, she imagined him writing it, and for
a moment she debated reading another, but she knew she couldn't delay any longer.
Lon was waiting for her.
Her legs felt weak as she stepped out of the car. She paused and took a deep breath,
and as she started across the parking lot, she realized she still wasn't sure what
she was going to say to him.
And the answer didn't finally come until she reached the door and opened it and saw
Lon standing in the lobby.
153
Te story ends there, so I close the notebook, remove my glasses, and wipe my eyes.
They are tired and bloodshot, but they have not failed me so far. They will soon,
I am sure. Neither they nor I can go on forever. I look to her now that I have finished,
but she does not look back. Instead she is staring out the window at the courtyard,
where friends and family meet.
My eyes follow hers, and we watch it together. In all these years the daily pattern
has not changed. Every morning, an hour after breakfast, they begin to arrive. Young
adults, alone or with family, come to visit those who live here. They bring photographs
and gifts and either sit on the benches or stroll along the tree-lined paths designed
to give a sense of nature. Some will stay for the day, but most leave after a few
154
hours, and when they do, I always feel sadness for those they've left behind. I wonder
sometimes what my friends think as they see their loved ones driving off, but I know
it's not my business. And I do not ever ask them because I've learned that we're
all entitled to have our secrets. But soon, I will tell you some of mine.
I place the notebook and magnifier on the table beside me, feeling the ache in my
bones as I do so, and I realize once again how cold my body is. Even reading in the
morning sun does nothing to help it. This does not surprise me anymore, though, for
my body makes its own rules these days.
I'm not completely unfortunate, however. The people who work here know me and my
faults and do their best to make me more comfortable. They have left me hot tea on
the end table, and I reach for it with both hands. It is an effort to pour a cup,
but I do so because the tea is needed to warm me and I think the exertion will keep
me from completely rusting away. But I am rusted now, no doubt about it. Rusted as
a junked car twenty years in the Everglades.
I have read to her this morning, as I do every morning, because it is something I
must do. Not for duty--although I suppose a case could be made for this--but for
another, more romantic, reason. I wish I could explain it more fully right now, but
it's still early, and talking about
155
romance isn't really possible before lunch anymore, at least not for me. Besides,
I have no idea how it's going to turn out, and to be honest, I'd rather not get my
hopes up.
We spend each and every day together now, but our nights are spent alone. The doctors
tell me that I'm not allowed to see her after dark. I understand the reasons completely,
and though I agree with them, I sometimes break the rules. Late at night when my
mood is right, I will sneak from my room and go to hers and watch her while she sleeps.
Of this she knows nothing. I'll come in and see her breathe and know that had it
not been for her, I would never have married. And when I look at her face, a face
I know better than my own, ! know that I have meant as much or more to her. And that
means more to me than I could ever hope to explain.
Sometimes, when I am standing there, I think about how lucky I am to have been married
to her for almost forty-nine years. Next month it will be that long. She heard .me
snore for the first forty-five, but since then we have slept in separate rooms. I
do not sleep well without her. I toss and turn and yearn for her warmth and lie there
most of the night, eyes open wide, watching the shadows dance across the ceilings
like tumbleweeds rolling across the desert. I sleep two hours if I am lucky, and
still I wake before dawn. This makes no sense to me.
Soon, this will all be over. I know this. She
156
does not. The entries in my diary have become shorter and take little time to write.
I keep them simple now, since most of my days are the same. But tonight I think I
will copy a poem that one of the nurses found for me and thought I would enjoy. It
goes like this:
I ne'er was struck before that hour With love so sudden and so sweet,
Her face it bloomed like a sweet flower And stole my heart away complete.
Because our evenings are our own, I have been asked to visit the others. Usually
I do, for I am the reader and I am needed, or so I am told. I walk the halls and
choose where to go because I am too old to devote myself to a schedule, but deep
down I always know who needs me. They are my friends, and when I push open their
doors, I see rooms that look like mine, always semidarkened, illuminated only by
the lights of
Wheel of Fortune
and Vanna's teeth. The furniture is the same for everyone, and the TVs blare because
no one can hear well anymore.
Men or women, they smile at me when I enter and speak in whispers as they turn off
their sets. "I'm so glad you've come," they say, and then they ask about my wife.
Sometimes I tell them. I might tell them of her sweetness and her charm and describe
how she taught me to see the world for the beautiful place it is. Or I tell them
of our
157
early years together and explain how we had all we needed when we held each other
under starry southern skies. On special occasions I whisper of our adventures together,
of art shows in New York and Paris or the rave reviews from critics writing in languages
I do not understand. Mostly, though, I smile and I tell them that she is the same,
and they turn from me, for I know they do not want me to see their faces. It reminds
them of their own mortality. So I sit with them and read to lessen their fears.
Be composed--be at ease with me... Not till the sun excludes you do I exclude
you,
Not till the waters refuse to glisten for you and the leaves to rustle for you, do
my words refuse to glisten and rustle for
yOU.
And I read, to let them know who I am.
I wander all night in my vision,... Bending with open eyes over the shut eyes
of sleepers,
Wandering and confused, lost to myself,
ill-assorted, contradictory,
Pausing, gazing, bending, and stopping.
If she could, my wife would accompany me on my evening excursions, for one of her
many
158
loves was poetry. Thomas, Whitman, Eliot, Shakespeare, and King David of the Psalms.
Lovers of words, makers of language. Looking back, I am surprised by my passion for
it, and sometimes I even regret it now. Poetry brings great beauty to life, but also
great sadness, and I'm not sure it's a fair exchange for someone my age. A man should
enjoy other things if he can; he should spend his final days in the sun. Mine will
be spent by a reading lamp.
I shuffle toward her and sit in the chair beside her bed. My back aches when I sit.
I must get a new cushion for this chair, I remind myself for the hundredth time.
I reach for her hand and take it, bony and fragile. It feels nice. She responds with
a twitch, and gradually her thumb begins to softly rub my finger. I do not speak
until she does; this I have learned. Most days I sit in silence until the sun goes
down, and on days like those I know nothing about her.
Minutes pass before she finally turns to me. She is crying. I smile and release her
hand, then reach in my pocket. I take out a handkerchief and wipe at her tears. She
looks at me as I do so,
and I wonder what she is thinking.
"That was a beautiful story."
A light rain begins to fall. Little drops tap gently on the window. I take her hand
again. It is going to be a good day, a very good day. A magical day. I smile, I can't
help it.
159
"Yes, it is," I tell her.
"Did you write it?" she asks. Her voice is like
a whisper, a light wind flowing though the leaves. "Yes," I answer.
She turns toward the nightstand. Her medicine is in a little cup. Mine too. Little
pills, colors like a rainbow so we won't forget to take them. They bring mine here
now, to her room,
even though they're not supposed to.
"I've heard it before, haven't I?'
"Yes," I say again, just as I do every time on days like these. I have learned to
be patient.
She studies my face. Her eyes are as green as ocean waves.
"It makes me feel less afraid," she says.
"I know." I nod, rocking my head softly.
She turns away, and I wait some more. She releases my hand and reaches for her water
glass. It is on her nightstand, next to the medicine. She takes a sip.
"Is it a true story?" She sits up a little in her bed and takes another, drink. Her
body is still strong. "I mean, did you know these people?"
"Yes," I say again. I could say more, but usually I don't. She is still beautiful.
She asks the obvious:
"Well, which one did she finally marry?"
I answer: "The one who was right for her." "Which one was that?"
I smile. "You'll know," I say quietly, "by the end of the day. You'll know."
160
She does not know what to think about this but does not question me further. Instead
she begins to fidget. She is thinking of a way to ask me another question, though
she isn't sure how to do it. Instead she chooses to put it off for a moment and
reaches for one of the little paper cups.
"Is this mine?"
"No, this one is," and I reach over and push her medicine toward her. I cannot grab
it with my fingers. She takes it and looks at the pills. I can tell by the way she
is looking at them that she has no idea what they are for. I use both hands to pick
up my cup and dump the pills into my mouth. She does the same. There is no fight
today. That makes it easy. I raise my cup in a mock toast and wash the gritty flavor
from my mouth with my tea. It is getting colder. She swallows on faith and washes
them down with more water.
A bird starts to sing outside the window, and we both turn our heads. We sit quietly
for a while, enjoying something beautiful together. Then it is lost, and she sighs.
"I have to ask you something else," she says. "Whatever it is, I'll try to answer."
"It's hard, though."
She does not look at me, and I cannot see her eyes. This is how she hides her thoughts.
Some things never change.
"Take your time," I say. I know what she will ask.
161
Finally she turns to me and looks into my eyes. She offers a gentle smile, the kind
you share with a child, not a lover.
"I don't want to hurt your feelings because you've been so nice to me, but..."
I wait. Her words will hurt me. They will tear a piece from my heart and leave a
scar.
"Who are you?"
We have lived at Creekside Extended Care Facility for three years now. It was her
decision to come here, partly because it was near our home, but also because she
thought it would be easier for me. We boarded up our home because neither of us could
bear to sell it, signed some papers, and just like that we received a place to live
and die in exchange for some of the freedom for which we had worked a lifetime.
She was right to do this, of course. There is no way I could have made it alone,
for sickness has come to us, both of us. We are in the final minutes in the day of
our lives, and the clock is ticking. Loudly. I wonder if I am the only one who can
hear it.
A throbbing pain courses through my fingers, and it reminds me that we have not held
hands with fingers interlocked since we moved here. I am sad about this, but it is
my fault, not hers. It is arthritis in the worst form, rheumatoid and advanced. My
hands are misshapen and grotesque now, and they throb during most of my
162
waking hours. I look at them and want them gone, amputated, but then I would not
be able to do the little things I must do. So I use my claws, as I call them sometimes,
and every day I take her hands despite the pain, and I do my best to hold them because
that is what she wants me to do.
Although the Bible says man can live to be 120, I don't want to, and I don't think
my body would make it even if I did. It is falling apart, dying one piece at a time,
steady erosion on the inside and at the joints. My hands are useless, my kidneys
are beginning to fail, and my heart rate is decreasing every month. Worse, I have
cancer again, this time of the prostate. This is my third bout with the unseen enemy,
and it will take me eventually, though not till I say it is time. The doctors are
worried about me, but I am not. I have no time for worry in this twilight of my life.
Of our five children, four are still living, and though it is hard for them to visit,
they come often, and for this I am thankful. But even when they aren't here, they
come alive in my mind every day, each of them, and they bring to mind the smiles
and tears that come with raising a family. A dozen pictures line the walls of my
room. They are my heritage, my contribution to the world. I am very proud. Sometimes
I wonder what my wife thinks of them as she dreams, or if she thinks of them at all,
or if she even dreams. There is so much about her I don't understand anymore.
163
I wonder what my daddy would think of my life and what he would do if he were me.
I have not seen him for fifty years and he is now but a shadow in my thoughts. I
cannot picture him clearly anymore; his face is darkened as if a light shines from
behind him. I am not sure if this is due to a failing memory or simply the passage
of time. I have only one picture of him, and this too has faded. In another ten years
it will be gone and so will I, and his memory will be erased like a message in the
sand. If not for my diaries, I would swear I had lived only half as long as I have.
Long periods of my life seem to have vanished. And even now I read the passages and
wonder who I was when I wrote them, for I cannot remember the events of my life.
There are times I sit and wonder where it all has gone.
"My name," I say, "is Duke." I have always been a John Wayne fan.
"Duke," she whispers to herself, "Duke." She thinks for a moment, her forehead wrinkled,
her eyes serious.
"Yes," I say, "I'm here for you." And always will be, I think to myself.
She flushes with my answer. Her eyes become wet and red, and tears begin to fall.
My heart aches for her, and I wish for the thousandth time that there was something
I could do. She says:
"I'm sorry. I don't understand anything that's happening to me right now. Even you.
When I
164
listen to you talk I feel like I should know you, but I don't. I don't even know
my name."
She wipes at her tears and says, "Help me, Duke, help me remember who I am. Or at
least, who I was. I feel so lost."
I answer from my heart, but I lie to her about her name. As I have about my own.
There is a reason for this.
"You are Hannah, a lover of life, a strength to those who shared in your friendships.
You are a dream, a creator of happiness, an artist who has touched a thousand souls.
You've led a full life and wanted for nothing because your needs are spiritual and
you have only to look inside you. You are kind and loyal, and you are able to see
beauty where others do not. You are a teacher of wonderful lessons, a dreamer of
better things."
I stop for a moment and catch my breath. Then, "Hannah, there is no reason to feel
lost, for:
Nothing is ever really lost, or can be lost, No birth, identity, form--no object
of the
world,
Nor life, nor force, nor any visible thing;...
The body, sluggish, aged, cold--the embers left from earlier fires,
... shall duly flame again;"
She thinks about what I have said for a moment. In the silence, I look toward the
win-
165
dow and notice that the rain has stopped now. Sunlight is beginning to filter into
her room. She asks:
"Did you write that?"
"No, that was Walt Whitman."
"Who?"
"A lover of words, a shaper of thoughts." She does not respond directly. Instead
she stares at me for a long while, until our breathing coincides. In. Out. In. Out.
In. Out. Deep breaths. I wonder if she knows I think she's beautiful.
"Would you stay with me a while?" she finally asks.
I smile and nod. She smiles back. She reaches for my hand, takes it gently, and pulls
it to her waist. She stares at the hardened knots that deform my fingers and caresses
them gently. Her hands are still those of an angel.
"Come," I say as I stand with great effort, "let's go for a walk. The air is crisp
and the goslings are waiting. It's beautiful today." I am staring at her as I say
these last few words.
She blushes. It makes me feel young again.
She was famous, of course. One of the best southern painters of the twentieth century,
some said, and I was, and am, proud of her. Unlike me, who struggled to write even
the simplest of verses, my wife could create beauty as easily as the Lord created
the earth. Her paintings are in
166
museums around the world, but I have kept only two for myself. The first one she
ever gave me and the last one. They hang in my room, and late at night I sit and
stare and sometimes cry when I look at them. I don't know why.
And so the years passed. We led our lives, working, painting, raising children, loving
each other. I see photos of Christmases, family trips, of graduations and of weddings.
I see grandchildren and happy faces. ! see photos of us, our hair growing whiter,
the lines in our faces deeper. A lifetime that seems so typical, yet uncommon.
We could not foresee the future, but then who can? I do not live now as I expected
to. And what did I expect? Retirement. Visits with the grandchildren, perhaps more
travel. She always loved to travel. I thought that perhaps I would start a hobby,
what I did not know, but possibly shipbuilding. In bottles. Small, detailed, impossible
to consider now with my hands. But I am not bitter.
Our lives can't be measured by our final years, of this I am sure, and I guess I
should have known what lay ahead in our lives. Looking back, I suppose it seems obvious,
but at first I thought her confusion understandable and not unique. She would forget
where she placed her keys, but who has not done that? She would forget a neighbor's
name, but not someone we knew well or with whom we socialized. Sometimes she would
write the wrong year when she made out her checks,
167
but again I dismissed it as simple mistakes that one makes when thinking of other
things.
It was not until the more obvious events occurred that I began to suspect the worst.
An iron in the freezer, clothes in the dishwasher, books in the oven. Other things,
too. But the day I found her in the car three blocks away, crying over the steering
wheel because she couldn't find her way home was the first day I was really frightened.
And she was frightened, too, for when I tapped on her window, she turned to me and
said, "Oh God, what's happening to me? Please help me." A knot twisted in my stomach,
but I dared not think the worst.
Six days later the doctor met with her and began a series of tests. I did not understand
them then and I do not understand them now, but I suppose it is because I am afraid
to know. She spent almost an hour with Dr. Barnwell, and she went back the next day.
That day was the longest day I ever spent. I looked through magazines I could not
read and played.games I did not think about. Finally he called us both into his office
and sat us down. She held my arm confidently, but I remember clearly that my own
hands were shaking.
"I'm so sorry to have to tell you this," Dr. Barnwell began, "but you seem to be
in the early stages of Alzheimer's .... "
My mind went blank, and all I could think about was the light that glowed above our
heads.
168
The words echoed in my head: the early stages of Alzheimer's . . .
My world spun in circles, and I felt her grip tighten on my arm. She whispered, almost
to herself: "Oh, Noah... Noah..."
And as the tears started to fall, the word came back to me again:... Alzheimer's...
It is a barren disease, as empty and lifeless as a desert. It is a thief of hearts
and souls and memories. I did not know what to say to her as she sobbed on my bosom,
so I simply held her and rocked her back and forth.
The doctor was grim. He was a good man, and this was hard for him. He was younger
than my youngest, and I felt my age in his presence. My mind was confused, my love
was shaking, and the only thing I could think was:
No drowning man can know which drop of water his last breath did stop;...
A wise poet's words, yet they brought me no comfort. I don't know what they meant
or why I thought of them.
We rocked to and fro, and Allie, my dream, my timeless beauty, told me she was sorry.
I knew there was nothing to forgive, and I whispered in her ear. "Everything will
be fine," I whispered, but inside I was afraid. I was a hollow man with nothing to
offer, empty as a junked stovepipe.
169
I remember only bits and pieces of Dr. Barnwell's continuing explanation.
"It's a degenerative brain disorder affecting memory and personality . . . there
is no cure or therapy .... There's no way to tell how fast it will progress.., it
differs from person to person ....
I wish I knew more .... Some days will be better
than others It will grow worse with the pas-sage of time I'm sorry to be the one
who has
to tell you "
I'm sorry...
I'm sorry...
I'm sorry...
Everyone was sorry. My children were brokenhearted, my friends were scared for themselves.
I don't remember leaving the doctor's office, and I don't remember driving home.
My memories of that day are gone, and in this my wife and I are the same.
It has been four years now. Since then we have made the best of it, if that is possible.
Allie organized, as was her disposition. She made arrangements to leave the house
and move here. She rewrote her will and sealed it. She left specific burial instructions,
and they sit in my desk, in the bottom drawer. I have not seen them. And when she
was finished, she began to write. Letters to friends and children. Letters to brothers
and sisters and cousins. Letters to nieces, nephews, and neighbors. And a letter
to me.
170
I read it sometimes when I am in the mood, and when I do, I am reminded of Allie
on cold winter evenings, seated by a roaring fire with a glass of wine at her side,
reading the letters I had written to her over the years. She kept them, these letters,
and now I keep them, for she made me promise to do so. She said I would know what
to do with them. She was right; I find I enjoy reading bits and pieces of them just
as she used to. They intrigue me, these letters, for when I sift through them I realize
that romance and passion are possible at any age. I see Allie now and know I've never
loved her more, but as I read the letters, I come to understand that I have always
felt the same way.
I read them last three evenings ago, long after I should have been asleep. It was
almost two o'clock when I went to the desk and found the stack of letters, thick
and tall and weathered. I untied the ribbon, itself almost half a century old, and
found the letters her mother had hidden so long ago and those from afterward. A lifetime
of letters, letters professing my love, letters from my heart. I glanced through
them with a smile on my face, picking and choosing, and finally opened a letter from
our first anniversary.
I read an excerpt:
When I see you now--moving slowly with new life growing inside you--I hope you know
how much you mean to me, and how
171
special this year has been. No man is more blessed than me, and I love you with all
my heart.
I put it aside, sifted through the stack, and found another, this from a cold evening
thirty-nine years ago.
Sitting next to you, while our youngest daughter sang off-key in the school Christmas
show, I looked at you and saw a pride that comes only to those who feel deeply in
their hearts, and I knew that no man could be more lucky than me.
And after our son died, the one who resembled his mother . . . It was the hardest
time we ever went through, and the words still ring true today:
In times of grief and sorrow ! will hold you and rock you, and take your grief and
make it my own. When you cry, I cry, and when you hurt, I hurt. And together we will
try to hold back the floods of tears and despair and make it through the potholed
streets of life.
I pause for just a moment, remembering him. He was four years old at the time, just
a baby. I have lived twenty times as long as he, but if asked, I would have traded
my life for his. It is a
172
terrible thing to outlive your child, a tragedy I wish upon no one.
I do my best to keep the tears away, sift through some more to clear my mind, and
find the next from our twentieth anniversary, something much easier to think about:
When ! see you, my darling, in the morning before showers or in your studio covered
with paint with hair matted and tired eyes, I know that you are the most beautiful
woman in the world.
They went on, this correspondence of life and love, and I read dozens more, some
painful, most heartwarming. By three o'clock I was tired, but I had reached the bottom
of the stack. There was one letter remaining, the last one I wrote her, and by then
I knew I had to keep going.
I lifted the seal and removed both pages. I put the second page aside and moved the
first page into better light and began to read:
My dearest Allie,
The porch is silent except for the sounds that float from the shadows, and for once
I am at a loss for words. It is a strange experience for me, for when I think of
you and the life we have shared, there is much to remember. A lifetime of memories.
But to
173
put it into words? I do not know if I am able. I am not a poet, and yet a poem is
needed to fully express the way I feel about you.
So my mind drifts, and I remember thinking about our life together as I made coffee
this morning. Kate was there, and so was Jane, and they both became quiet when I
walked in the kitchen. I saw they'd been crying, and without a word, I sat myself
beside them at the table and held their hands. And do you know what I saw when I
looked at them? I saw you from so long ago, the day we said good-bye. They resemble
you and how you were then, beautiful and sensitive and wounded with the hurt that
comes when something special is taken away. And for a reason I'm not sure I understand,
I was inspired to tell them a story.
I called Jeff and David into the kitchen, for they were here as well, and when the
children were ready, I told them about us and how you came back to me so long ago.
I told them about our walk, and the crab dinner in the kitchen, and they listened
with smiles when they heard about the canoe ride, and sitting in front of the fire
with the storm raging outside. I told them about your mother warning us about Lon
the next day--they seemed as surprised as
174
we were--and yes, I even told them what happened later that day, after you went back
to town.
That part of the story has never left me, even after all this time. Even though I
wasn't there, you described it to me only once, and I remember marveling at the strength
you showed that day. I still cannot imagine what was going through your mind when
you walked into the lobby and saw Lon, or how it must have felt to talk to him. You
told me that the two of you left the inn and sat on a bench by the old Methodist
church, and that he held your hand, even as you explained that you must stay.
I know you cared for him. And his reaction proves to me he cared for you as well.
No, he could not understand losing you, but how could he? Even as you explained that
you had always loved me, and that it wouldn't be fair to him, he did not release
your hand. I know he was hurt and angry, and tried for almost an hour to change
your mind, but when you stood firm and sacl, "I can't go back with you, I'm so
sorry," he knew that your decision had been made. You said he simply nodded and the
two of you sat together for a long time without speaking. I have always wondered
what he was thinking as he sat with you, but I'm sure it was the same way I felt
only
175
a few
hours before. And when he finally walked you to your car, you said he told you that
I was a lucky man. He behaved as a gentleman would, and I understood then why your
choice was so hard.
I remember that when I finished the story, the room was quiet until Kate finally
stood to embrace me. "Oh,
Daddy," she said with tears in her eyes, and though I expected to answer their questions,
they did not ask any. Instead, they gave me something much more special.
For the next four hours, each of them told me how much we, the two of us, had meant
to them growing up. One by one, they told stories about things ! had long since forgotten.
And by the end, I was crying because I realized how well we had done with raising
them. I was so proud of them, and proud of you, and happy about the life we have
led. And nothing will ever take that away. Nothing. I only wish you would have been
here to enjoy it with me.
After they left, I rocked in silence, thinking back on our life together. You are
always here with me when I do so, at least in my heart, and it is impossible for
me to remember a time when you were not a part of me. I do not know who I would have
become had you never come back to me that day, but I have no doubt that I would
176
have lived and died with regrets that thankfully I'll never know.
I love you, Allie. I am who I am because of you. You are every reason, every hope,
and every dream I've ever had, and no matter what happens to us in the future, every
day we are together is the greatest day of my life. I will always be yours.
And, my darling, you will always be mine.
Noah
I put the pages aside and remember sitting with Allie on our porch when she read
this letter for the first time. It was late afternoon, with red streaks cutting the
summer sky, and the last remnants of the day were fading. The sky was slowly changing
color, and as I was watching the sun go down, I remember thinking about that brief,
flickering moment when day suddenly turns into night.
Dusk, I realized then, is just an illusion, because the sun is either above the horizon
or below it. And that means that day and night are linked in a way that few things
are; there cannot be one without the other, yet they cannot exist at the same time.
How would it feel, I remember wondering, to be always together, yet forever apart?
Looking back, I find it ironic that she chose to
177
read the letter at the exact moment that question popped into my head. It is ironic,
of course, because I know the answer now. I know what it's like to be day and night
now; always together, forever apart.
There is beauty where we sit this afternoon, Allie and I. This is the pinnacle of
my life吩hey are here at the creek: the birds, the geese, my friends. Their bodies
float on the cool water, which reflects bits and pieces of their colors and make
them seem larger than they really are. Allie too is taken in by their wonder, and
little by little we get to know each other again.
"It's good to talk to you. I find that I miss it, even when it hasn't been that long."
I am sincere and she knows this, but she is still wary. I am a stranger.
"Is this something we do often?" she asks. "Do we sit here and watch the birds a
lot? I mean, do we know each other well?"
"Yes and no. I think everyone has secrets, but we have been acquainted for years."
She looks to her hands, then mine. She thinks about this for a moment, her face at
such an angle that she looks young again. We do not wear our rings. Again, there
is a reason for this. She asks:
"Were you ever married?"
I nod.
Ye s 阀
178
"What was she like?"
I tell the truth.
"She was my dream. She made me who I am, and holding her in my arms was more natural
to me than my own heartbeat. I think about her all the time. Even now, when I'm sitting
here, I think about her. There could never have been another.''
She takes this in. I don't know how she feels about this. Finally she speaks softly,
her voice angelic, sensual. I wonder if she knows I think these things.
"Is she dead?"
What is death? I wonder, but I do not say this. Instead I answer, "My wife is alive
in my heart. And she always will be."
"You still love her, don't you?"
"Of course. But I love many things. I love to sit here with you. I love to share
the beauty of this place with someone I care about. I love to watch the osprey swoop
toward the creek and find its dinner."
She is quiet for a moment. She looks away so I can't see her face. It has been her
habit for
years.
"Why are you doing this?" No fear, just curiosity. This is good. I know what she
means,
but I ask anyway.
"What?"
"Why are you spending the day with me?" I smile.
179
"I'm here because this is where I'm supposed to be. It's not complicated. Both you
and I are enjoying ourselves. Don't dismiss my time with you--it's not wasted. It's
what I want. I sit here and we talk and I think to myself, What could be better than
what I am doing now?"
She looks me in the eyes, and for a moment, just a moment, her eyes twinkle. A slight
smile forms on her lips.
"I like being with you, but if getting me intrigued is what you're after, you've
succeeded. I admit I enjoy your company, but I know nothing about you. I don't expect
you to tell me your life story, but why are you so mysterious?"
"I read once that women love mysterious strangers."
"See, you haven't really answered the question. You haven't answered most of my questions.
You didn't even tell me how the story ended this morning."
I shrug. We sit quietly for a while. Finally I ask: "Is it true?" "Is what true?"
"That women love mysterious strangers ?"
She thinks about this and laughs. Then she answers as I would:
"I think some women do."
"Do you?"
"Now don't go putting me on the spot. I don't know you well enough for that." She
is teasing me, and I enjoy it.
180
We sit silently and watch the world around us. This has taken us a lifetime to learn.
It seems only the old are able to sit next to one another and not say anything and
still feel content. The young, brash and impatient, must always break the silence.
It is a waste, for silence is pure. Silence is holy. It draws people together because
only those who are comfortable with each other can sit without speaking. This is
the great paradox.
Time passes, and gradually our breathing begins to coincide just as it did this morning.
Deep breaths, relaxed breaths, and there is a moment when she dozes off, like those
comfortable with one another often do. I wonder if the young are capable of enjoying
this. Finally, when she wakes, a miracle.
"Do you see that bird?" She points to it, and I strain my eyes. It is a wonder I
can see it, but I can because the sun is bright. I point, too.
"Caspian stern," I say softly, and we devote our attention to it and stare as it
glides over Brices Creek. And, like an old habit rediscovered, when I lower my arm,
I put my hand on her knee and she doesn't make me move it.
She is right about my evasiveness. On days like these, when only her memory is gone,
I am vague in my answers because I've hurt my wife unintentionally with careless
slips of my tongue many times these past few years, and I am deter-
181
mined not to let it happen again. So I limit myself and answer only what is asked,
sometimes not too well, and I volunteer nothing.
This is a split decision, both good and bad, but necessary, for with knowledge comes
pain. To limit the pain I limit my answers. There are days she never learns of her
children or that we are married. I am sorry for this, but I will not change.
Does this make me dishonest? Perhaps, but I have seen her crushed by the waterfall
of information that is her life. Could I look myself in the mirror without red eyes
and quivering jaw and know I have forgotten all that was important to me? I could
not and neither can she, for when this odyssey began, this is how I began. Her life,
her marriage, her children. Her friends and her work. Questions and answers in the
game show format of
This Is Your Life.
The days were hard on both of us. I was an encyclopedia, an object without feeling,
of the whos, whats and wheres'in her life, when in reality it is the whys, the things
I did not know and could not answer, that make it all worthwhile. She would stare
at pictures of forgotten offspring, hold paintbrushes that inspired nothing, and
read love letters that brought back no joy. She would weaken over the hours, growing
paler, becoming bitter, and ending the day worse than when it began. Our days were
lost, and so was she. And selfishly, so was I.
182
So I changed. I became Magellan or Columbus, an explorer in the mysteries of the
mind, and I learned, bumbling and slow, but learning nonetheless what had to .be
done. And I learned what is obvious to a child. That life is simply a collection
of little lives, each lived one day at a time. That each day should be spent finding
beauty in flowers and poetry and talking to animals. That a day spent with dreaming
and sunsets and refreshing breezes cannot be bettered. But most of all, I learned
that life is about sitting on benches next to ancient creeks with my hand on her
knee and sometimes, on good days, for falling in love.
"What are you thinking?" she asks.
It is now dusk. We have left our bench and are shuffling along lighted paths that
wind their way around this complex. She is holding my arm, and I am her escort. It
is her idea to do this. Perhaps she is charmed by me. Perhaps she wants to keep me
from falling. Either way, I am smiling to myself.
"I'm thinking about you."
She makes no response to this except to squeeze my arm, and I can tell she likes
what I said. Our life together has enabled me to see the clues, even if she does
not know them herself. I go on:
"I know you can't remember who you are, but I can, and I find that when I look at
you, it makes me feel good."
183
She taps my arm and smiles. "You're a kind man with a loving heart. I hope I enjoyed
you as much before as I do now."
We walk some more. Finally she says, "I have
to tell you something."
"Go ahead."
"I think I have an admirer."
"An admirer?"
"I see."
"You don't believe me?" "I believe you." "You should." "Why?"
"Because I think it is you."
I think about this as we walk in silence, holding each other, past the rooms, past
the courtyard. We come to the garden, mainly wildflowers, and I stop her. I pick
a bundle--red, pink, yellow, violet. I give them to her, and she brings them to her
nose. She smells them with eyes closed and she whispers, "They're.beautiful." We
resume our walk, me in one hand, the flowers in another. People watch us, for we
are a walking miracle, or so I am told. It is true in a way, though most times I
do not feel lucky.
"You think it's me?" I finally ask. "Yes." "Why?"
"Because I have found what you have hidden." "What?"
184
"This," she says, handing a small slip of paper to me. "I found it under my pillow."
I read it, and it says:
The body slows with mortal ache, yet my
promise
remains true at the closing of our days, A tender touch that ends with a kiss will
awaken love in joyous ways.
"Are there more?" I ask.
"I found this in the pocket of my coat."
Our souls were one, if you must know
and never shall they be apart; With splendid dawn, your face aglow
I reach for you and find my heart.
"I see," and that is all I say.
We walk as the sun sinks lower in the sky. In time, silver twilight is the only remainder
of the day, and still we talk of the poetry. She is enthralled by the romance.
By the time we reach the doorway, I am tired. She knows this, so she stops me with
her hand and makes me face her. I do and I realize how hunched over I have become.
She and I are now level. Sometimes I am glad she doesn't know how much I have changed.
She turns to me and stares for a long time.
"What are you doing?" I ask.
185
"I don't want to forget you or this day, and I'm trying to keep your memory alive."
Will it work this time? I wonder, then know it will not. It can't. I do not tell
her my thoughts, though. I smile instead because her words are sweet.
"Thank you," I say.
"I mean it. I don't want to forget you again. You're very special to me. I don't
know what I would have done without you today."
My throat closes a little. There is emotion behind her words, the emotions I feel
whenever I think of her. I know this is why I live, and I love her dearly at this
moment. How I wish I were strong enough to carry her in my arms to paradise.
"Don't try to say anything," she tells me. "Let's just feel the moment."
And I do, and I feel heaven.
Her disease is worse now than it was in the beginning, though Allie is different
from most. There are three others with the disease here, and these three are the
sum of my practical experience with it. They, unlike Allie, are in the most advanced
stages of Alzheimer's and are almost completely lost. They wake up hallucinating
and confused. They repeat themselves over and over. Two of the three can't feed themselves
and will die soon. The third has a tendency to wander and get lost. She was found
once in a stranger's
186
car a quarter mile away. Since then she has been strapped to the bed. All can be
very bitter at times, and at other times they can be like lost children, sad and
alone. Seldom do they recognize the staff or people who love them. It is a trying
disease, and this is why it is hard for their children and mine to visit.
Allie, of course, has her own problems, too, problems that will probably grow worse
over time. She is terribly afraid in the mornings and cries inconsolably. She sees
tiny people, like gnomes, I think, watching her, and she screams at them to get away.
She bathes willingly but will not eat regularly. She is thin now, much too thin,
in my opinion, and on good days I do my best to fatten her up.
But this is where the similarity ends. This is why Allie is considered a miracle,
because sometimes, just sometimes, after I read to her, her condition isn't so bad.
There is no explanation for this. "It's impossible," the doctors say. "She must not
have Alzheimer's." But she does. On most days and every morning there can be no doubt.
On this there is agreement.
But why, then, is her condition different? Why does she sometimes change after I
read? I tell the doctors the reason--I know it in my heart, but I am not believed.
Instead they look to science. Four times specialists have traveled from Chapel Hill
to find the answer. Four times they have left without understanding. I tell them,
"You can't
187
possibly understand it if you use only your training and your books," but they shake
their heads and answer: "Alzheimer's does not work like this. With her condition,
it's just not possible to have a conversation or improve as the day goes on. Ever."
But she does. Not every day, not most of the time, and definitely less than she used
to. But sometimes. And all that is gone on these days is her memory, as if she has
amnesia. But her emotions are normal, her thoughts are normal. And these are the
days that I know I am doing right.
Dinner is waiting in her room when we return. It has been arranged for us to eat
here, as it always is on days like these, and once again I could ask for no more.
The people here take care of everything. They are good to me, and I am thankful.
The lights are dimmed, the room is lit by two candles on the table where we will
sit, and music is playing softly in the background. The cups and plates are plastic,
and the carafe is filled with apple juice, but rules are rules and she doesn't seem
to care. She inhales slightly at the sight. Her eyes are wide.
"Did you do this?"
I nod and she walks in the room.
"It looks beautiful."
I offer my arm in escort and lead her to the window. She doesn't release it when
we get there.
188
Her touch is nice, and we stand close together on this crystal springtime evening.
The window is open slightly, and I feel a breeze as it fans my cheek. The moon has
risen, and we watch for a long time as the evening sky unfolds.
"I've never seen anything so beautiful, I'm sure of it," she says, and I agree with
her.
"I haven't, either," I say, but I am looking at her. She knows what I mean, and !
see her smile. A moment later she whispers:
"I think I know who Allie went with at the end of the story," she says.
"You do?"
"Who?"
"She went with Noah." "You're sure?" "Absolutely."
I smile and nod. "Yes, she did," I say softly, and she smiles back. Her face is radiant.
I pull out her chair with some effort. She sits and I sit opposite her. She offers
her hand across the table, and I take it in mine, and I feel her thumb begin to move
as it did so many years ago. Without speaking, ! stare at her for a long time, living
and reliving the moments of my life, remembering it all and making it real. I feel
my throat begin to tighten, and once again I realize how much I love her. My voice
is shaky when I finally speak.
"You're so beautiful," I say. I can see in her
189
eyes that she knows how I feet about her and what I really mean by my words.
She does not respond. Instead she lowers her eyes and I wonder what she's thinking.
She gives me no clues, and I gently squeeze her hand. I wait. With all my dreams,
I know her heart, and I know I'm almost there.
And then, a miracle that proves me right.
As Glenn Miller plays softly in a candlelit room, I watch as she gradually gives
in to the feelings inside her. I see a warm smile begin to form on her lips, the
kind that makes it all worthwhile, and I watch as she raises her hazy eyes to mine.
She pulls my hand toward her.
"You're wonderful... ," she says softly, trailing off, and at that moment she falls
in love with me, too; this I know, for I have seen the signs a thousand times.
She says nothing else right away, she doesn't have to, and she gives me a look from
another lifetime that makes me whole again. I smile back, with as much passion as
I can muster, and we stare at each other with the feelings inside us rolling like
ocean waves. I look around the room, then up to the ceiling, then back at Allie,
and the way she's looking at me makes me warm. And suddenly I feel young again. I'm
no longer cold or aching, or hunched over or deformed, or almost blind with cataractal
eyes.
I'm strong and proud, and the luckiest man
190
alive, and I keep on feeling that way for a long time across the table.
By the time the candles have burned down a third, I am ready to break the silence.
I say, "I love you deeply, and I hope you know that."
"Of course I do," she says breathlessly. "I've always loved you, Noah."
Noah, I hear again. Noah. The word echoes in my head. Noah... Noah. She knows, I
think to
myself, she knows who I am ....
She knows ....
Such a tiny thing, this knowledge, but for me it is a gift from God, and I feel our
lifetime together, holding her, loving her, and being with her through the best years
of my life.
She murmurs, "Noah... my sweet Noah..." And I, who could not accept the doctor's
words, have triumphed again, at least for a moment. I give up the pretense of mystery,
and I kiss her hand and bring it to my cheek and whisper in her ear. I say:
"You are the greatest thing that has ever happened to me."
"Oh . . . Noah," she says with tears in her eyes, "I love you, too."
If only it would end like this, I would be a happy man.
But it won't. Of this I'm sure, for as time slips by, I begin to see the signs of
concern in her face.
191
"What's wrong?" I ask, and her answer comes softly.
"I'm so afraid. I'm afraid of forgetting you again. It isn't fair... I just can't
bear to give this up."
Her voice breaks as she finishes, but I don't know what to say. I know the evening
is coming to an end, and there is nothing I can do to stop the inevitable. In this
I am a failure. I finally tell her:
"I'11 never leave you. What we have is forev-e r."
She knows this is all I can do, for neither of us wants empty promises. But I can
tell by the way she is looking at me that once again she wishes there were more.
The crickets serenade us, and we begin to pick at our dinner. Neither one of us is
hungry, but I lead by example and she follows me. She takes small bites and chews
a long time, but I am glad to see her eat. She has lost too much weight in the past
three months.
After dinner, I become afraid despite myself. I know I should be joyous, for this
reunion is the proof that love can still be ours, but I know the bell has tolled
this evening. The sun has long since set and the thief is about to come, and there
is nothing I can do to stop it. So I stare at her and wait and live a lifetime in
these last remaining moments.
Nothing.
192
The clock ticks.
Nothing.
I take her in my arms and we hold each other. Nothing.
I feel her tremble and I whisper in her ear. Nothing.
I tell her for the last time this evening that I love her.
And the thief comes.
It always amazes me how quickly it happens. Even now, after all this time. For as
she holds me, she begins to blink rapidly and shake her head. Then, turning toward
the corner of the room, she stares for a long time, concern etched on her face.
No! my mind screams. Not yet! Not now... not when we're so close! Not tonight! Any
night but tonight.... Please!
The words are inside me.
I can't take it again! It isn't fair.., it isn't fair.... But once again, it is to
no avail.
"Those people," she finally says, pointing,
"are staring at me. Please make them stop." The gnomes.
A pit rises in my stomach, hard and full. My breathing stops for a moment, then starts
again, this time shallower. My mouth goes dry, and I feel my heart pounding. It is
over, ! know, and I am right. The sundowning has come. This, the evening confusion
associated with Alzheimer's disease that affects my wife, is the hardest part of
all. For when it comes, she is gone, and some-
193
times I wonder whether she and I will ever love again.
"There's no one there, Allie," I say, trying to
fend off the inevitable. She doesn't believe me. "They're staring at me."
"No," I whisper while shaking my head. "You can't see them?"
"No," I say, and she thinks for a moment.
"Well, they're right there," she says, pushing me away, "and they're staring at me."
With that, she begins to talk to herself, and moments later, when I try to comfort
her, she flinches with wide eyes.
"Who are you?" she cries with panic in her voice, her face becoming whiter. "What
are you doing here?" There is fear growing inside her, and I hurt, for there is nothing
I can do. She moves farther from me, backing away, her hands in a defensive position,
and then she says the most heartbreaking words of all.
"Go away! Stay away from me!" she screams. She is pushing the gnomes away from her,
terrified, now oblivious of my presence.
I stand and cross the room to her bed. I am weak now, my legs ache, and there is
a strange pain in my side. I don't know where it comes from. It is a struggle to
press the button to call the nurses, for my fingers are throbbing and seem frozen
together, but I finally succeed. They will be here soon now, I know, and I wait for
them. While I wait, I stare at my wife.
194
Twenty...
Thirty seconds pass, and I continue to stare, my eyes missing nothing, remembering
the moments we just shared together. But in all that time she does not look back,
and I am haunted by the visions of her struggling with unseen enemies.
I sit by the bedside with an aching back and start to cry as I pick up the notebook.
Allie does not notice. I understand, for her mind is gone.
A couple of pages fall to the floor, and I bend over to pick them up. I am tired
now, so I sit, alone and apart from my wife. And when the nurses come in they see
two people they must comfort. A woman shaking in fear from demons in her mind, and
the old man who loves her more deeply than life itself, crying softly in the corner,
his face in his hands.
I spend the rest of the evening alone in my room. My door is partially open and I
see people walk by, some strangers, some friends, and if I concentrate, I can hear
them talking about families, jobs, and visits to parks. Ordinary conversations, nothing
more, but I find that I envy them and the ease of their communication. Another deadly
sin, I know, but sometimes I can't help it.
Dr. Barnwell is here, too, speaking with one of the nurses, and I wonder who is ill
enough to
195
warrant such a visit at this hour. He works too much, I tell him. Spend the time
with your family, I say, they won't be around forever. But he doesn't listen to me.
He cares for his patients, he says, and must come here when called. He says he has
no choice, but this makes him a man torn by contradiction. He wants to be a doctor
completely devoted to his patients and a man completely devoted to his family. He
cannot be both, for there aren't enough hours, but he has yet to learn this. I wonder,
as his voice fades into the background, which he will choose or whether, sadly, the
choice will be made for him.
I sit by the window in an easy chair and I think about today. It was happy and sad,
wonderful and heart-wrenching. My conflicting emotions keep me silent for many hours.
I did not read to anyone this evening; I could not, for poetic introspection would
bring me to tears. In time, the hallways become quiet except for the footfalls of
evening soldiers. At eleven o'clock I hear the familiar sounds that for some reason
I
expected. The footsteps I know so well.
Dr. Barnwell peeks in.
"I noticed your light was on. Do you mind if I come in?"
"No," I say, shaking my head.
He comes in and looks around the room before taking a seat a few feet from me.
"I hear," he says, "you had a good day with Allie." He smiles. He is intrigued by
us and the
196
relationship we have. I do not know if his inter-
est is entirely professional.
"I suppose so."
He cocks his head at my answer and looks at
me. "You okay, Noah? You look a little down." "I'm fine. Just a little tired." "How
was Allie today?"
"She was okay. We talked for almost four hours."
"Four hours? Noah, that's.., incredible."
I can only nod. He goes on, shaking his head. "I've never seen anything like it,
or even heard about it. I guess that's what love is all about. You two were meant
for each other. She must love you very much. You know that, don't you?"
"I know," I say, but I can't say anything more. "What's really bothering you, Noah?
Did Allie say or do something that hurt your feelings?''
"No. She was wonderful, actually. It's just that right now I feel.., alone."
"Alone?"
"Nobody's alone."
"I'm alone," I say as I look at my watch and think of his family sleeping in a quiet
house, the place he should be, "and so are you."
The next few days passed without significance. Allie was unable to recognize me at
any time, and I admit my attention waned now and
197
then, for most of my thoughts were of the day we had just spent. Though the end always
comes too soon, there was nothing lost that day, only gained, and I was happy to
have received this blessing once again.
By the following week, my life had pretty much returned to normal. Or at least as
normal as my life can be. Reading to Allie, reading to others, wandering the halls.
Lying awake at night and sitting by my heater in the morning. I find a strange comfort
in the predictability of my life.
On a cool, foggy morning eight days after she and I had spent our day together, I
woke early, as is my custom, and puttered around my desk, alternately looking at
photographs and reading letters written many years before. At least I tried to. I
couldn't concentrate too well because I had a headache, so I put them aside and went
to sit in my chair by the window to watch the sun come up. Allie would be awake in
a couple of hours, I knew, and I wanted to be refreshed, for reading all day would
only make my head hurt more.
I closed my eyes for a few minutes while my head alternately pounded and subsided.
Then, opening them, I watched my old friend, the creek, roll by my window. Unlike
Allie, I had been given a room where I could see it, and it has never failed to inspire
me. It is a contradiction--this creek--a hundred thousand years old but
198
renewed with each rainfall. I talked to it that morning, whispered so it could hear,
"You are blessed, my friend, and I am blessed, and together we meet the coming days."
The ripples and waves circled and twisted in agreement, the pale glow of morning
light reflecting the world we share. The creek and I. Flowing, ebbing, receding.
It is life, I think, to watch the water. A man can learn so many things.
It happened as I sat in the chair, just as the sun first peeked over the horizon.
My hand, I noticed, started to tingle, something it had never done before. I started
to lift it, but I was forced to stop when my head pounded again, this time hard,
almost as if I had been hit in the head with a hammer. I closed my eyes, then squeezed
my lids tight. My hand stopped tingling and began to go numb, quickly, as if my nerves
were suddenly severed somewhere on my lower arm. My wrist locked as a shooting pain
rocked my head and seemed to flow down my neck and into every cell of my body, like
a tidal wave, crushing and wasting everything in its path.
I lost my sight, and I heard what sounded like a train roaring inches from my head,
and I knew that I was having a stroke. The pain coursed through my body like a lightning
bolt, and in my last remaining moments of consciousness, I pictured Allie, lying
in her bed, waiting for the story I would never read, lost and confused, completely
and totally unable to help herself. Just like me.
199
And as my eyes closed for the final time, I thought to myself, Oh God, what have
I done?
! was unconscious on and off for days, and in those moments when I was awake, I found
myself hooked to machines, tubes up my nose and down my throat and two bags of fluid
hanging near the bed. I could hear the faint hum of machines, droning on and off,
sometimes making sounds I could not recognize. One machine, beeping with my heart
rate, was strangely soothing, and I found myself lulled to never-land time and time
again.
The doctors were worried. I could see the concern in their faces through squinted
eyes as they scanned the charts and adjusted the machines. They whispered their thoughts,
thinking I couldn't hear. "Strokes could be serious," they'd say, "especially for
someone his age, and the consequences could be severe." Grim faces would prelude
their predictions--"loss of speech, loss of movement, paralysis." Another chart notation,
another beep of a strange machine, and they'd leave, never knowing I heard every
word. I tried not to think of these things afterward but instead concentrated on
Allie, bringing a picture of her to my mind whenever I could. I did my best to bring
her life into mine, to make us one again. ! tried to feel her touch, hear her voice,
see her face, and when I did tears would fill my eyes because I didn't know if I
would be able to hold
200
her again, to whisper to her, to spend the day with her talking and reading and walking.
This was not how I'd imagined, or hoped, it would end. I'd always assumed I would
go last. This wasn't how it was supposed to be.
I drifted in and out of consciousness for days until another foggy morning when my
promise to Allie spurred my body once again. I opened my eyes and saw a room full
of flowers, and their scent motivated me further. I looked for the buzzer, struggled
to press it, and a nurse arrived thirty seconds later, followed closely by Dr. Barnwell,
who smiled almost immediately.
"I'm thirsty," I said with a raspy voice, and Dr. Barnwell smiled broadly.
"Welcome back," he said, "I knew you'd make it."
Two weeks later I am able to leave the hospital, though I am only half a man now.
If I were a Cadillac, I would drive in circles, one wheel turning, for the right
side of my body is weaker than the left. This, they tell me, is good news, for the
paralysis could have been total. Sometimes, it seems, I am surrounded by optimists.
The bad news is that my hands prevent me from using either cane or wheelchair, so
I must now march to my own unique cadence to keep upright. Not left-right-left as
was common in my youth, or even the shuffle-shuffle of late, but rather slow-shuffle,
slide-the-right, slow-shuffle.
201
I am an epic adventure now when I travel the halls. It is slow going even for me,
this coming from a man who could barely outpace a turtle two weeks ago.
It is late when I return, and when I reach my room, I know I will not sleep. I breathe
deeply and smell the springtime fragrances that filter through my room. The window
has been left open, and there is a slight chill in the air. I find that I am invigorated
by the change in temperature. Evelyn, one of the many nurses here who is one-third
my age, helps me to the chair that sits by the window and begins to close it. I stop
her, and though her eyebrows rise, she accepts my decision. I hear a drawer open,
and a moment later a sweater is draped over my shoulders. She adjusts it as if I
were a child, and when she is finished, she puts her hand on my shoulder and pats
it gently. She says nothing as she does this, and by her silence I know that she
is staring out the window. She does not move for a long time, and I wonder what she
is thinking, but I do not ask. Eventually I hear her sigh. She turns to leave, and
as she does, she stops, leans forward, and then kisses me on the cheek, tenderly,
the way my granddaughter does. I am surprised by this, and she says quietly, "It's
good to have you back. Allie's missed you and so have the rest of us. We were all
praying for you because it's just not the same around here when you're gone." She
smiles at me and touches my face before she leaves. I
202
say nothing. Later I hear her walk by again, pushing a cart, talking to another nurse,
their voices hushed.
The stars are out tonight, and the world is glowing an eerie blue. The crickets are
singing, and their sound drowns out everything else. As I sit, I wonder if anyone
outside can see me, this prisoner of flesh. I search the trees, the courtyard, the
benches near the geese, looking for signs of life, but there is nothing. Even the
creek is still. In the darkness it looks like empty space, and I find that I'm drawn
to its mystery. I watch for hours, and as I do, I see the reflection of clouds as
they begin to bounce off the water. A storm is coming, and in time the sky will turn
silver, like dusk again.
Lightning cuts the wild sky, and I feel my mind drift back. Who are we, Allie and
I? Are we ancient ivy on a cypress tree, tendrils and branches intertwined so closely
that we would both die if we were forced apart? I don't know. Another bolt and the
table beside me is lit enough to see a picture of Allie, the best one I have. I had
it framed years ago in the hope that the glass would make it last forever. I reach
for it and hold it inches from my face. I stare at it for a long time, I can't help
it. She was forty-one when it was taken, and she had never been more beautiful. There
are so many things I want to ask her, but I know the picture won't answer, so I put
it aside.
203
Tonight, with Allie down the hall, I am alone. I will always be alone. This I thought
as I lay in the hospital. This I'm sure of as I look out the window and watch the
storm clouds appear. Despite myself I am saddened by our plight, for I realize that
the last day we were together I never kissed her lips. Perhaps I never will again.
It is impossible to tell with this disease. Why do I think such things?
I finally stand and walk to my desk and turn on the lamp. This takes more effort
than I think it will, and I am strained, so I do not return to the window seat. I
sit down and spend a few minutes looking at the pictures that sit on my desk. Family
pictures, pictures of children and vacations. Pictures of Allie and me. I think back
to the times we shared together, alone or with family, and once again I realize how
ancient I am.
I open a drawer and find the flowers I'd once given her long ago, old and faded and
tied together with ribbon. They, like me, are dry and brittle and difficult to handle
without breaking. But she saved them. "I don't understand what you want with them,"
! would say, but she would just ignore me. And sometimes in the evenings I would
see her holding them, almost reverently, as if they offered the secret of life itself.
Women.
Since this seems to be a night of memories, I look for and find my wedding ring.
It is in the
204
top drawer, wrapped in tissue. I cannot wear it anymore because my knuckles are swollen
and my fingers lack for blood. I unwrap the tissue and find it unchanged. It is powerful,
a symbol, a circle, and I know,
I know,
there could never have been another. I knew it then, and I know it now. And in that
moment I whisper aloud, "I am still yours, Allie, my queen, my timeless beauty. You
are, and always have been, the best thing in my life."
I wonder if she hears me when I say this, and I wait for a sign. But there is nothing.
It is eleven-thirty and I look for the letter she wrote me, the one I read when the
mood strikes me. I find it where I last left it. I turn it over a couple of times
before I open it, and when I do my hands begin to tremble. Finally I read:
Dear Noah,
I write this letter by candlelight as you lie sleeping in the bedroom we have shared
since the day we were married. And though I can't hear the soft sounds of your slumber,
I know you are there, and soon I will be lying next to you again as I always have.
And I will feel your warmth and your comfort, and your breaths will slowly guide
me to the place where I dream of you and the wonderful man you are.
I see the flame beside me and it reminds
205
me of another fire from decades ago, with me in your soft clothes and you in your
jeans. ! knew then we would always be together, even though I wavered the following
day. My heart had been captured, roped by a southern poet, and I knew inside that
it had always been yours. Who was I to question a love that rode on shooting stars
and roared like crashing waves? For that is what it was between us then and that
is what it is today.
! remember coming back to you the next day, the day my mother visited. ! was so scared,
more scared than I had ever been because I was sure you would never forgive me for
leaving you. ! was shaking as ! got out of the car, but you took it all away with
your smile and the way you held your hand out to me. "How 'bout some coffee," was
all you said. And you never brought it up again. In all our years together.
Nor did you question me when I would leave and walk alone the next few days. And
when I came in with tears in my eyes, you always knew whether ! needed you to hold
me or to just let me be. I don't know how you knew, but you did, and you made it
easier for me. Later when we went to the small chapel and traded our rings and made
our vows, I looked in your eyes and knew I had made the right decision. But
206
more than that, I knew I was foolish for ever considering someone else. I have never
wavered since.
We had a wonderful life together, and I think about it a lot now. I close my eyes
sometimes and see you with speckles of gray in your hair, sitting on the porch and
playing your guitar while little ones play and clap to the music you create. Your
clothes are stained from hours of work and you are tired, and though I offer you
time to relax, you smile and say, "That what I am doing now." I find your love for
our children very sensual and exciting. "You're a better father than you know," I
tell you later, after the children are sleeping. Soon after, we peel off our clothes
and kiss each other and almost lose ourselves before we are able to slip between
the flannel sheets.
I love you for many things, especially your passions, for they have always been those
things which are most beautiful in life. Love and poetry and fatherhood and friendship
and beauty and nature. And ! am glad you have taught the children these things, for
I know their lives are better for it. They tell me how special you are to them, and
every time they do, it makes me feel like the luckiest woman alive.
You have taught me as well, and inspired me, and supported me in my painting, and
207
you will never know how much it has meant to me. My works hang in museums and private
collections now, and though there have been times when I was frazzled and distracted
because of shows and critics, you were always there with kind words, encouraging
me. You understood my need for my own studio, my own space, and saw beyond the paint
on my clothes and in my hair and sometimes on the furniture. ! know it was not easy.
It takes a man to do that, Noah, to live with something like that. And you have.
For forty-five years now. Wonderful years.
You are my best friend as well as my lover, and I do not know which side of you I
enjoy the most. ! treasure each side, just as I have treasured our life together.
You have something inside you, Noah, something beautiful and strong. Kindness, that's
what I see when I look at you now, that's what everyone sees. Kindness. You are the
most forgiving and peaceful man I know. God is with you, He must be, for you are
the closest thing to an angel that !'ve ever met.
I know you thought me crazy for making us write our story before we finally leave
our home, but I have my reasons and I thank you for your patience. And though you
asked, I never told you why, but now I think it is time you knew.
208
We have lived a lifetime most couples never know, and yet, when I look at you, I
am frightened by the knowledge that all this will be ending soon. For we both know
my prognosis and what it will mean to us. I see your tears and I worry more about
you than I do about me, because I fear the pain I know you will go through. There
are no words to express my sorrow for this, and I am at a loss for words.
So I love you so deeply, so incredibly much, that I will find a way to come back
to you despite my disease, I promise you that. And this is where the story comes
in. When I am lost and lonely, read this story--just as you told it to the children--and
know that in some way, I will realize it about us. And perhaps, just perhaps, we
will find a way to be together again.
Please don't be angry with me on days I do not remember you, and we both know they
will come. Know that I love you, that I always will, and that no matter what happens,
know I have led the greatest life possible. My life with you.
And if you save this letter to read again, then believe what I am writing for you
now. Noah, wherever you are and whenever this is, I love you. I love you now as I
write this, and I love you now as you read this. And I am so sorry if I am not able
to
209
tell you. I love you deeply, my husband. You are, and always have been, my dream.
Allie
When I am finished with the letter, I put it aside. I rise from my desk and find
my slippers. They are near my bed, and I must sit to put them on. Then, standing,
I cross the room and open my door. I peek down the hall and see Janice seated at
the main desk. At least I think it is Janice. I must pass this desk to get to Allie's
room, but at this hour I am not supposed to leave my room, and Janice has never been
one to bend the rules. Her husband is a lawyer.
I wait to see if she will leave, but she does not seem to be moving, and I grow impatient.
I finally exit my room anyway, slow-shuffle, slide-the-right, slow-shuffle. It takes
aeons to close the distance, but for some reason she does not see me approaching.
I am a silent panther creeping through the jungle, I am as invisible as baby pigeons.
In the end I am discovered, but I am not surprised. I stand before her.
"Noah," she says, "what are you doing?" "I'm taking a walk," I say. "I can't sleep."
"You know you're not supposed to do this." "I know."
I don't move, though. I am determined.
"You're not really going for a walk, are you? You're going to see Allie."
210
"Yes," I answer.
"Noah, you know what happened the last
time you saw her at night."
"I remember."
"Then you know you shouldn't be doing this."
I don't answer directly. Instead I say, "I miss her."
"I know you do, but I can't let you see her."
"It's our anniversary," I say. This is true. It is
one year before gold. Forty-nine years today. "I see."
"Then I can go?"
She looks away for a moment, and her voice changes. Her voice is softer now, and
I am surprised. She has never struck me as the sentimental type.
"Noah, I've worked here for five years and I worked at another home before that.
I've seen hundreds of couples struggle with grief and sadness, but I've never seen
anyone handle it like you do. No one around here, not the doctors, not the nurses,
has ever seen anything like it."
She pauses for just a moment, and strangely, her eyes begin to fill with tears. She
wipes them with her finger and goes on:
"I try to think what it's like for you, how you keep going day after day, but I can't
even imagine it. I don't know how you do it. You even beat her disease sometimes.
Even though the doctors don't understand it, we nurses do. It's love, it's as
211
simple as that. It's the most incredible thing I've ever seen."
A lump has risen in my throat, and I am speechless.
"But Noah, you're not supposed to do this, and I can't let you. So go back to your
room." Then, smiling softly and sniffling and shuffling some papers on the desk,
she says: "Me, I'm going downstairs for some coffee. I won't be back to check on
you for a while, so don't do anything foolish."
She rises quickly, touches my arm, and walks toward the stairs. She doesn't look
back, and suddenly I am alone. I don't know what to think. I look at where she had
been sitting and see her coffee, a full cup, still steaming, and once again I learn
that there are good people in the world.
I am warm for the first time in years as I begin my trek to Allie's room. I take
steps the size of Pixie straws, and even at that pace it is dangerous, for my legs
have grown tired already. I find I must touch the wall to keep from falling down.
Lights buzz overhead, their fluorescent glow making my eyes ache, and I squint a
little. I walk by a dozen darkened rooms, rooms where I have read before, and I realize
I miss the people inside. They are my friends, whose faces I know so well, and I
will see them all tomorrow. But not tonight, for there is no time to stop on this
journey. I press on, and the movement forces blood through banished arteries. I feel
myself becoming
212
stronger with every step. I hear a door open behind me, but I don't hear footsteps,
and I keep going. I am a stranger now. I cannot be stopped. A phone rings in the
nurses' station, and I push forward so I will not be caught. I am a midnight bandit,
masked and fleeing on horseback from sleepy desert towns, charging into yellow moons
with gold dust in my saddlebags. I am young and strong with passion in my heart,
and I will break down the door and lift her in my arms and carry her to paradise.
Who am I kidding?
I lead a simple life now. I am foolish, an old man in love, a dreamer who dreams
of nothing but reading to Allie and holding her whenever I can. I am a sinner with
many faults and a man who believes in magic, but I am too old to change and too old
to care.
When I finally reach her room my body is weak. My legs wobble, my eyes are blurred,
and my heart is beating funny inside my chest. I struggle with the knob, and in the
end it takes two hands and three truckloads of effort. The door opens and light from
the hallway spills in, illuminating the bed where she sleeps. I think, as I see her,
I am nothing but a passerby on a busy city street, forgotten forever.
Her room is quiet, and she is lying with the covers halfway up. After a moment I
see her roll to one side, and her noises bring back memories of happier times. She
looks small in her bed, and
213
as I watch her I know it is over between us. The air is stale and I shiver. This
place has become our tomb.
I do not move, on this our anniversary, for almost a minute, and I long to tell her
how I feel, but I stay quiet so I won't wake her. Besides, it is written on the slip
of paper that I will slide under her pillow. It says:
Love, in these last and tender hours
is sensitive and very pure
Come morning light with soft-lit powers to awaken love that's ever sure.
I think I hear someone coming, so I enter her room and close the door behind me.
Blackness descends and I cross her floor from memory and reach the window. I open
the curtains, and the moon stares back, large and full, the guardian of the evening.
I turn to Allie and dream a thousand dreams, and though I know I should not, I sit
on her bed while I slip the note beneath her pillow. Then I reach across and gently
touch her face, soft like powder. I stroke her hair, and my breath is taken away.
I feel wonder, I feel awe, like a composer first discovering the works of Mozart.
She stirs and opens her eyes, squinting softly, and I suddenly regret my foolishness,
for I know she will begin to cry and scream, for this is what she always does. I
am impulsive and weak, this I know, but [ feel an urge to attempt the impossi-
214 Nicholas Sparks
ble and I lean toward her, our faces drawing closer.
And when her lips meet mine, I feel a strange tingling I have never felt before,
in all our years together, but I do not pull back. And suddenly, a miracle, for I
feel her mouth open and I discover a forgotten paradise, unchanged all this time,
ageless like the stars. I feel the warmth of her body, and as our tongues meet, I
allow myself to slip away, as I had so many years ago. I close my eyes and become
a mighty ship in churning waters, strong and fearless, and she is my sails. I gently
trace the outline of her cheek, then take her hand in mine. I kiss her lips, her
cheeks, and listen as she takes a breath. She murmurs softly, "Oh, Noah... I've missed
you." Another mira-cie--the greatest of all!--and there's no way I can stop the tears
as we begin to slip toward heaven itself. For at that moment, the world is full of
wonder as I feel her fingers reach for the buttons on my shirt and slowly, ever so
slowly, she begins to undo them one by one.
